ack; but one suspender supported his
trousers; the seat of the trousers bagged low and con-
tained nothing, the fringed legs dragged in the dirt
when not rolled up.

Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will.
He slept on doorsteps in fine weather and in empty
hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to school or
to church, or call any being master or obey anybody;
he could go fishing or swimming when and where he
chose, and stay as long as it suited him; nobody forbade
him to fight; he could sit up as late as he pleased; he
was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring
and the last to resume leather in the fall; he never had
to wash, nor put on clean clothes; he could swear
wonderfully. In a word, everything that goes to make
life precious that boy had. So thought every harassed,
hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg.

Tom hailed the romantic outcast:

"Hello, Huckleberry!"

"Hello yourself, and see how you like it."

"What's that you got?"

"Dead cat."

"Lemme see him, Huck. My, he's pretty stiff.
Where'd you get him ?"

"Bought him off'n a boy."

"What did you give?"

"I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the
slaughter-house."

"Where'd you get the blue ticket?"

"Bought it off'n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a
hoop-stick."

"Say -- what is dead cats good for, Huck?"

"Good for? Cure warts with."

"No! Is that so? I know something that's better."

"I bet you don't. What is it?"

"Why, spunk-water."

"Spunk-water! I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-
water."

"You wouldn't, wouldn't you? D'you ever try it?"

"No, I hain't. But Bob Tanner did."

"Who told you so!"

"Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny
Baker, and Johnny told Jim Hollis, and Jim told
Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the nigger
told me. There now!"

"Well, what of it? They'll all lie. Leastways all
but the nigger. I don't know HIM. But I never see a
nigger that WOULDN'T lie. Shucks! Now you tell me
how Bob Tanner done it, Huck."

"Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten
stump where the rain-water was."

"In the daytime?"

"Certainly."

"With his face to the stump?"

"Yes. Least I reckon so."

"Did he say anything?"

"I don't reckon he did. I don't know."

"Aha! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-
water such a blame fool way as that! Why, that ain't
a-going to do any good. You got to go all by yourself,
to the middle of the woods, where you know there's
a spunk-water stump, and just as it's midnight you back
up against the stump and jam your hand in and say:

  'Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts,
   Spunk-water, spunk-water, swaller these warts,'

and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your
eyes shut, and then turn around three times and walk
home without speaking to anybody. Because if you
speak the charm's busted."

"Well, that sounds like a good way; but that ain't
the way Bob Tanner done."

"No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the
wartiest boy in this town; and he wouldn't have a
wart on him if he'd knowed how to work spunk-
water. I've took off thousands of warts off of my
hands that way, Huck. I play with frogs so much
that I've always got considerable many warts. Some-
times I take 'em off with a bean."

"Yes, bean's good. I've done that."

"Have you? What's your way?"

"You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so
as to get some blood, and then you put the blood on
one piece of the bean and take and dig a hole and
bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark
of the moon, and then you burn up the rest of the bean.
You see that piece that's got the blood on it will keep
drawing and drawing, trying to fetch the other piece to
it, and so that helps the blood to draw the wart, and
pretty soon off she comes."

"Yes, that's it, Huck -- that's it; though when you're
burying it if you say 'Down bean; off wart; come no
more to bother me!' it's better. That's the way Joe
Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and
most everywheres. But say -- how do you cure 'em
with dead cats?"

"Why, you take your cat and go and get in the grave-
yard 'long about midnight when somebody that was
wicked has been buried; and when it's midnight a devil
will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see
'em, you can only hear something like the wind, or
maybe hear 'em talk; and when they're taking that feller
away, you heave your cat after 'em and say, 'Devil
follow corpse, cat follow devil, warts follow cat, I'm
done with ye!' That'll fetch ANY wart."

"Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck?"

"No, but old Mother Hopkins told me."

"Well, I reckon it's so, then. Becuz they say she's
a witch."

"Say! Why, Tom, I KNOW she is. She witched
pap. Pap says so his own self. He come along one
day, and he see she was a-witching him, so he took up
a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her. Well,
that very night he rolled off'n a shed wher' he was a
layin drunk, and broke his arm."

"Why, that's awful. How did he know she was
a-witching him?"

"Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they
keep looking at you right stiddy, they're a-witching
you. Specially if they mumble. Becuz when they
mumble they're saying the Lord's Prayer backards."

"Say, Hucky, when you going to try the cat?"

"To-night. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss
Williams to-night."

"But they buried him Saturday. Didn't they get
him Saturday night?"

"Why, how you talk! How could their charms
work till midnight? -- and THEN it's Sunday. Dev-
ils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't
reckon."

"I never thought of that. That's so. Lemme go
with you?"

"Of course -- if you ain't afeard."

"Afeard! 'Tain't likely. Will you meow?"

"Yes -- and you meow back, if you get a chance.
Last time, you kep' me a-meowing around till old
Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says 'Dern
that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his window
-- but don't you tell."

"I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie
was watching me, but I'll meow this time. Say --
what's that?"

"Nothing but a tick."

"Where'd you get him?"

"Out in the woods."

"What'll you take for him?"

"I don't know. I don't want to sell him."

"All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway."

"Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong
to them. I'm satisfied with it. It's a good enough
tick for me."

"Sho, there's ticks a plenty. I could have a thou-
sand of 'em if I wanted to."

"Well, why don't you? Becuz you know mighty
well you can't. This is a pretty early tick, I reckon.
It's the first one I've seen this year."

"Say, Huck -- I'll give you my tooth for him."

"Less see it."

Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled
it. Huckleberry viewed it wistfully. The tempta-
tion was very strong. At last he said:

"Is it genuwyne?"

Tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy.

"Well, all right," said Huckleberry, "it's a trade."

Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box
that had lately been the pinchbug's prison, and the
boys separated, each feeling wealthier than before.

When Tom reached the little isolated frame school-
house, he strode in briskly, with the manner of one
who had come with all honest speed. He hung his
hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with busi-
ness-like alacrity. The master, throned on high in his
great splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the
drowsy hum of study. The interruption roused him.

"Thomas Sawyer!"

Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in
full, it meant trouble.

"Sir!"

"Come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again,
as usual?"

Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he
saw two long tails of yellow hair hanging down a back
that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love;
and by that form was THE ONLY VACANT PLACE on the
girls' side of the school-house. He instantly said:

"I STOPPED TO TALK WITH HUCKLEBERRY FINN!"

The master's pulse stood still, and he stared help-
lessly. The buzz of study ceased. The pupils won-
dered if this foolhardy boy had lost his mind. The
master said:

"You -- you did what?"

"Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn."

There was no mistaking the words.

"Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding con-
fession I have ever listened to. No mere ferule will
answer for this offence. Take off your jacket."

The master's arm performed until it was tired and
the stock of switches notably diminished. Then the
order followed:

"Now, sir, go and sit with the girls! And let this
be a warning to you."

The titter that rippled around the room appeared
to abash the boy, but in reality that result was caused
rather more by his worshipful awe of his unknown
idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good
fortune. He sat down upon the end of the pine bench
and the girl hitched herself away from him with a toss
of her head. Nudges and winks and whispers traversed
the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the
long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book.

By and by attention ceased from him, and the ac-
customed school murmur rose upon the dull air once
more. Presently the boy began to steal furtive glances
at the girl. She observed it, "made a mouth" at him
and gave him the back of her head for the space of a
minute. When she cautiously faced around again,
a peach lay before her. She thrust it away. Tom
gently put it back. She thrust it away again, but with
less animosity. Tom patiently returned it to its place.
Then she let it remain. Tom scrawled on his slate,
"Please take it -- I got more." The girl glanced at the
words, but made no sign. Now the boy began to draw
something on the slate, hiding his work with his left
hand. For a time the girl refused to notice; but her
human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by
hardly perceptible signs. The boy worked on, ap-
parently unconscious. The girl made a sort of non-
committal attempt to see, but the boy did not betray
that he was aware of it. At last she gave in and hesi-
tatingly whispered:

"Let me see it."

Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a
house with two gable ends to it and a corkscrew of
smoke issuing from the chimney. Then the girl's
interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she
forgot everything else. When it was finished, she
gazed a moment, then whispered:

"It's nice -- make a man."

The artist erected a man in the front yard, that
resembled a derrick. He could have stepped over
the house; but the girl was not hypercritical; she was
satisfied with the monster, and whispered:

"It's a beautiful man -- now make me coming
along."

Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw
limbs to it and armed the spreading fingers with a
portentous fan. The girl said:

"It's ever so nice -- I wish I could draw."

"It's easy," whispered Tom, "I'll learn you."

"Oh, will you? When?"

"At noon. Do you go home to dinner?"

"I'll stay if you will."

"Good -- that's a whack. What's your name?"

"Becky Thatcher. What's yours? Oh, I know.
It's Thomas Sawyer."

"That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when
I'm good. You call me Tom, will you?"

"Yes."

Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate,
hiding the words from the girl. But she was not
backward this time. She begged to see. Tom said:

"Oh, it ain't anything."

"Yes it is."

"No it ain't. You don't want to see."

"Yes I do, indeed I do. Please let me."

"You'll tell."

"No I won't -- deed and deed and double deed
won't."

"You won't tell anybody at all? Ever, as long as
you live?"

"No, I won't ever tell ANYbody. Now let me."

"Oh, YOU don't want to see!"

"Now that you treat me so, I WILL see." And she
put her small hand upon his and a little scuffle ensued,
Tom pretending to resist in earnest but letting his hand
slip by degrees till these words were revealed: "I LOVE
YOU."

"Oh, you bad thing!" And she hit his hand a
smart rap, but reddened and looked pleased, never-
theless.

Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful
grip closing on his ear, and a steady lifting impulse.
In that vise he was borne across the house and de-
posited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of
giggles from the whole school. Then the master
stood over him during a few awful moments, and
finally moved away to his throne without saying a
word. But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart
was jubilant.

As the school quieted down Tom made an honest
effort to study, but the turmoil within him was too
great. In turn he took his place in the reading class
and made a botch of it; then in the geography class
and turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers,
and rivers into continents, till chaos was come again;
then in the spelling class, and got "turned down," by
a succession of mere baby words, till he brought up at
the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he had
worn with ostentation for months.


CHAPTER VII

THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind
on his book, the more his ideas wandered.
So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave
it up. It seemed to him that the noon
recess would never come. The air was
utterly dead. There was not a breath
stirring. It was the sleepiest of sleepy days. The
drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying
scholars soothed the soul like the spell that is in the
murmur of bees. Away off in the flaming sunshine,
Cardiff Hill lifted its soft green sides through a shim-
mering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of distance;
a few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other
living thing was visible but some cows, and they were
asleep. Tom's heart ached to be free, or else to have
something of interest to do to pass the dreary time.
His hand wandered into his pocket and his face lit up
with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did
not know it. Then furtively the percussion-cap box
came out. He released the tick and put him on the
long flat desk. The creature probably glowed with a
gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment,
but it was premature: for when he started thankfully
to travel off, Tom turned him aside with a pin and made
him take a new direction.

Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just
as Tom had been, and now he was deeply and grate-
fully interested in this entertainment in an instant.
This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys
were sworn friends all the week, and embattled enemies
on Saturdays. Joe took a pin out of his lapel and
began to assist in exercising the prisoner. The sport
grew in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they
were interfering with each other, and neither getting
the fullest benefit of the tick. So he put Joe's slate on
the desk and drew a line down the middle of it from top
to bottom.

"Now," said he, "as long as he is on your side you
can stir him up and I'll let him alone; but if you let him
get away and get on my side, you're to leave him alone
as long as I can keep him from crossing over."

"All right, go ahead; start him up."

The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed
the equator. Joe harassed him awhile, and then he
got away and crossed back again. This change of
base occurred often. While one boy was worrying the
tick with absorbing interest, the other would look on
with interest as strong, the two heads bowed together
over the slate, and the two souls dead to all things else.
At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The
tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as
excited and as anxious as the boys themselves, but time
and again just as he would have victory in his very
grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be twitching
to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep
possession. At last Tom could stand it no longer.
The temptation was too strong. So he reached out
and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was angry in a
moment. Said he:

"Tom, you let him alone."

"I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe."

"No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone."

"Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much."

"Let him alone, I tell you."

"I won't!"

"You shall -- he's on my side of the line."

"Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick?"

"I don't care whose tick he is -- he's on my side of
the line, and you sha'n't touch him."

"Well, I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick
and I'll do what I blame please with him, or die!"

A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoul-
ders, and its duplicate on Joe's; and for the space
of two minutes the dust continued to fly from the
two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The
boys had been too absorbed to notice the hush that had
stolen upon the school awhile before when the master
came tiptoeing down the room and stood over them.
He had contemplated a good part of the performance
before he contributed his bit of variety to it.

When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky
Thatcher, and whispered in her ear:

"Put on your bonnet and let on you're going home;
and when you get to the corner, give the rest of 'em
the slip, and turn down through the lane and come back.
I'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same
way."

So the one went off with one group of scholars, and
the other with another. In a little while the two met
at the bottom of the lane, and when they reached the
school they had it all to themselves. Then they sat
together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky
the pencil and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so
created another surprising house. When the interest
in art began to wane, the two fell to talking. Tom
was swimming in bliss. He said:

"Do you love rats?"

"No! I hate them!"

"Well, I do, too -- LIVE ones. But I mean dead
ones, to swing round your head with a string."

"No, I don't care for rats much, anyway. What
I like is chewing-gum."

"Oh, I should say so! I wish I had some now."

"Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it
awhile, but you must give it back to me."

That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about,
and dangled their legs against the bench in excess of
contentment.

"Was you ever at a circus?" said Tom.

"Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some
time, if I'm good."

"I been to the circus three or four times -- lots of
times. Church ain't shucks to a circus. There's
things going on at a circus all the time. I'm going
to be a clown in a circus when I grow up."

"Oh, are you! That will be nice. They're so
lovely, all spotted up."

"Yes, that's so. And they get slathers of money
-- most a dollar a day, Ben Rogers says. Say, Becky,
was you ever engaged?"

"What's that?"

"Why, engaged to be married."

"No."

"Would you like to?"

"I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like?"

"Like? Why it ain't like anything. You only
just tell a boy you won't ever have anybody but him,
ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's all. Any-
body can do it."

"Kiss? What do you kiss for?"

"Why, that, you know, is to -- well, they always
do that."

"Everybody?"

"Why, yes, everybody that's in love with each
other. Do you remember what I wrote on the slate?"

"Ye -- yes."

"What was it?"

"I sha'n't tell you."

"Shall I tell YOU?"

"Ye -- yes -- but some other time."

"No, now."

"No, not now -- to-morrow."

"Oh, no, NOW. Please, Becky -- I'll whisper it,
I'll whisper it ever so easy."

Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent,
and passed his arm about her waist and whispered
the tale ever so softly, with his mouth close to her
ear. And then he added:

"Now you whisper it to me -- just the same."

She resisted, for a while, and then said:

"You turn your face away so you can't see, and
then I will. But you mustn't ever tell anybody --
WILL you, Tom? Now you won't, WILL you?"

"No, indeed, indeed I won't. Now, Becky."

He turned his face away. She bent timidly around
till her breath stirred his curls and whispered, "I --
love -- you!"

Then she sprang away and ran around and around
the desks and benches, with Tom after her, and took
refuge in a corner at last, with her little white apron to
her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded:

"Now, Becky, it's all done -- all over but the kiss.
Don't you be afraid of that -- it ain't anything at all.
Please, Becky." And he tugged at her apron and the
hands.

By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop;
her face, all glowing with the struggle, came up and
submitted. Tom kissed the red lips and said:

"Now it's all done, Becky. And always after this,
you know, you ain't ever to love anybody but me, and
you ain't ever to marry anybody but me, ever never
and forever. Will you?"

"No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and
I'll never marry anybody but you -- and you ain't to
ever marry anybody but me, either."

"Certainly. Of course. That's PART of it. And
always coming to school or when we're going home,
you're to walk with me, when there ain't anybody
looking -- and you choose me and I choose you at
parties, because that's the way you do when you're
engaged."

"It's so nice. I never heard of it before."

"Oh, it's ever so gay! Why, me and Amy
Lawrence --"

The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped,
confused.

"Oh, Tom! Then I ain't the first you've ever
been engaged to!"

The child began to cry. Tom said:

"Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any
more."

"Yes, you do, Tom -- you know you do."

Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she
pushed him away and turned her face to the wall,
and went on crying. Tom tried again, with sooth-
ing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again.
Then his pride was up, and he strode away and went
outside. He stood about, restless and uneasy, for a
while, glancing at the door, every now and then,
hoping she would repent and come to find him. But
she did not. Then he began to feel badly and fear
that he was in the wrong. It was a hard struggle
with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved
himself to it and entered. She was still standing back
there in the corner, sobbing, with her face to the wall.
Tom's heart smote him. He went to her and stood a
moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then
he said hesitatingly:

"Becky, I -- I don't care for anybody but you."

No reply -- but sobs.

"Becky" -- pleadingly. "Becky, won't you say some-
thing?"

More sobs.

Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from
the top of an andiron, and passed it around her so
that she could see it, and said:

"Please, Becky, won't you take it?"

She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched
out of the house and over the hills and far away, to
return to school no more that day. Presently Becky
began to suspect. She ran to the door; he was not
in sight; she flew around to the play-yard; he was
not there. Then she called:

"Tom! Come back, Tom!"

She listened intently, but there was no answer.
She had no companions but silence and loneliness.
So she sat down to cry again and upbraid herself;
and by this time the scholars began to gather again,
and she had to hide her griefs and still her broken
heart and take up the cross of a long, dreary, aching
afternoon, with none among the strangers about her
to exchange sorrows with.


CHAPTER VIII

TOM dodged hither and thither through
lanes until he was well out of the track
of returning scholars, and then fell into a
moody jog. He crossed a small "branch"
two or three times, because of a prevailing
juvenile superstition that to cross water
baffled pursuit. Half an hour later he was disappear-
ing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit
of Cardiff Hill, and the school-house was hardly dis-
tinguishable away off in the valley behind him. He
entered a dense wood, picked his pathless way to the
centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a
spreading oak. There was not even a zephyr stirring;
the dead noonday heat had even stilled the songs of
the birds; nature lay in a trance that was broken by no
sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a wood-
pecker, and this seemed to render the pervading silence
and sense of loneliness the more profound. The boy's
soul was steeped in melancholy; his feelings were in
happy accord with his surroundings. He sat long with
his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands,
meditating. It seemed to him that life was but a
trouble, at best, and he more than half envied Jimmy
Hodges, so lately released; it must be very peaceful, he
thought, to lie and slumber and dream forever and
ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and
caressing the grass and the flowers over the grave,
and nothing to bother and grieve about, ever any
more. If he only had a clean Sunday-school record
he could be willing to go, and be done with it all.
Now as to this girl. What had he done? Nothing.
He had meant the best in the world, and been treated
like a dog -- like a very dog. She would be sorry some
day -- maybe when it was too late. Ah, if he could only
die TEMPORARILY!

But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed
into one constrained shape long at a time. Tom
presently began to drift insensibly back into the con-
cerns of this life again. What if he turned his back,
now, and disappeared mysteriously? What if he went
away -- ever so far away, into unknown countries beyond
the seas -- and never came back any more! How
would she feel then! The idea of being a clown
recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust.
For frivolity and jokes and spotted tights were an
offense, when they intruded themselves upon a spirit
that was exalted into the vague august realm of the
romantic. No, he would be a soldier, and return after
long years, all war-worn and illustrious. No -- better
still, he would join the Indians, and hunt buffaloes
and go on the warpath in the mountain ranges and the
trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in
the future come back a great chief, bristling with
feathers, hideous with paint, and prance into Sunday-
school, some drowsy summer morning, with a blood-
curdling war-whoop, and sear the eyeballs of all his
companions with unappeasable envy. But no, there
was something gaudier even than this. He would be
a pirate! That was it! NOW his future lay plain
before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor.
How his name would fill the world, and make people
shudder! How gloriously he would go plowing the
dancing seas, in his long, low, black-hulled racer, the
Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying at
the fore! And at the zenith of his fame, how he would
suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church,
brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet
and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson sash, his
belt bristling with horse-pistols, his crime-rusted cut-
lass at his side, his slouch hat with waving plumes,
his black flag unfurled, with the skull and crossbones
on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings,
"It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate! -- the Black Avenger of
the Spanish Main!"

Yes, it was settled; his career was determined.
He would run away from home and enter upon it.
He would start the very next morning. Therefore
he must now begin to get ready. He would collect
his resources together. He went to a rotten log near
at hand and began to dig under one end of it with his
Barlow knife. He soon struck wood that sounded
hollow. He put his hand there and uttered this in-
cantation impressively:

"What hasn't come here, come! What's here, stay
here!"

Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine
shingle. He took it up and disclosed a shapely little
treasure-house whose bottom and sides were of shingles.
In it lay a marble. Tom's astonishment was bound-
less! He scratched his head with a perplexed air,
and said:

"Well, that beats anything!"

Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and
stood cogitating. The truth was, that a superstition
of his had failed, here, which he and all his comrades
had always looked upon as infallible. If you buried
a marble with certain necessary incantations, and
left it alone a fortnight, and then opened the place
with the incantation he had just used, you would find
that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered
themselves together there, meantime, no matter how
widely they had been separated. But now, this thing
had actually and unquestionably failed. Tom's whole
structure of faith was shaken to its foundations. He
had many a time heard of this thing succeeding but
never of its failing before. It did not occur to him
that he had tried it several times before, himself, but
could never find the hiding-places afterward. He
puzzled over the matter some time, and finally decided
that some witch had interfered and broken the charm.
He thought he would satisfy himself on that point; so
he searched around till he found a small sandy spot
with a little funnel-shaped depression in it. He laid
himself down and put his mouth close to this de-
pression and called --

"Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to
know! Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want
to know!"

The sand began to work, and presently a small
black bug appeared for a second and then darted
under again in a fright.

"He dasn't tell! So it WAS a witch that done it. I
just knowed it."

He well knew the futility of trying to contend against
witches, so he gave up discouraged. But it occurred
to him that he might as well have the marble he had
just thrown away, and therefore he went and made
a patient search for it. But he could not find it.
Now he went back to his treasure-house and carefully
placed himself just as he had been standing when he
tossed the marble away; then he took another marble
from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying:

"Brother, go find your brother!"

He watched where it stopped, and went there and
looked. But it must have fallen short or gone too
far; so he tried twice more. The last repetition was
successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each
other.

Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly
down the green aisles of the forest. Tom flung off his
jacket and trousers, turned a suspender into a belt,
raked away some brush behind the rotten log, dis-
closing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin
trumpet, and in a moment had seized these things
and bounded away, barelegged, with fluttering shirt.
He presently halted under a great elm, blew an answer-
ing blast, and then began to tiptoe and look warily out,
this way and that. He said cautiously -- to an imag-
inary company:

"Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow."

Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elab-
orately armed as Tom. Tom called:

"Hold! Who comes here into Sherwood Forest
without my pass?"

"Guy of Guisborne wants no man's pass. Who
art thou that -- that --"

"Dares to hold such language," said Tom, prompt-
ing -- for they talked "by the book," from memory.

"Who art thou that dares to hold such language?"

"I, indeed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff carcase
soon shall know."

"Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw? Right
gladly will I dispute with thee the passes of the merry
wood. Have at thee!"

They took their lath swords, dumped their other
traps on the ground, struck a fencing attitude, foot
to foot, and began a grave, careful combat, "two
up and two down." Presently Tom said:

"Now, if you've got the hang, go it lively!"

So they "went it lively," panting and perspiring
with the work. By and by Tom shouted:

"Fall! fall! Why don't you fall?"

"I sha'n't! Why don't you fall yourself? You're
getting the worst of it."

"Why, that ain't anything. I can't fall; that ain't
the way it is in the book. The book says, 'Then with
one back-handed stroke he slew poor Guy of Guis-
borne.' You're to turn around and let me hit you in
the back."

There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe
turned, received the whack and fell.

"Now," said Joe, getting up, "you got to let me
kill YOU. That's fair."

"Why, I can't do that, it ain't in the book."

"Well, it's blamed mean -- that's all."

"Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much
the miller's son, and lam me with a quarter-staff; or
I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and you be Robin
Hood a little while and kill me."

This was satisfactory, and so these adventures
were carried out. Then Tom became Robin Hood
again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to
bleed his strength away through his neglected wound.
And at last Joe, representing a whole tribe of weeping
outlaws, dragged him sadly forth, gave his bow into
his feeble hands, and Tom said, "Where this arrow
falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the green-
wood tree." Then he shot the arrow and fell back
and would have died, but he lit on a nettle and sprang
up too gaily for a corpse.

The boys dressed themselves, hid their accoutre-
ments, and went off grieving that there were no out-
laws any more, and wondering what modern civiliza-
tion could claim to have done to compensate for their
loss. They said they would rather be outlaws a year
in Sherwood Forest than President of the United
States forever.


CHAPTER IX

AT half-past nine, that night, Tom and
Sid were sent to bed, as usual. They
said their prayers, and Sid was soon
asleep. Tom lay awake and waited, in
restless impatience. When it seemed to
him that it must be nearly daylight, he
heard the clock strike ten! This was despair. He
would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded,
but he was afraid he might wake Sid. So he lay
still, and stared up into the dark. Everything was
dismally still. By and by, out of the stillness, little,
scarcely preceptible noises began to emphasize them-
selves. The ticking of the clock began to bring it-
self into notice. Old beams began to crack mysteri-
ously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits
were abroad. A measured, muffled snore issued
from Aunt Polly's chamber. And now the tiresome
chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could
locate, began. Next the ghastly ticking of a death-
watch in the wall at the bed's head made Tom shudder
-- it meant that somebody's days were numbered.
Then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air,
and was answered by a fainter howl from a remoter
distance. Tom was in an agony. At last he was
satisfied that time had ceased and eternity begun; he
began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed
eleven, but he did not hear it. And then there came,
mingling with his half-formed dreams, a most mel-
ancholy caterwauling. The raising of a neighboring
window disturbed him. A cry of "Scat! you devil!"
and the crash of an empty bottle against the back of
his aunt's woodshed brought him wide awake, and a
single minute later he was dressed and out of the win-
dow and creeping along the roof of the "ell" on all
fours. He "meow'd" with caution once or twice, as
he went; then jumped to the roof of the woodshed and
thence to the ground. Huckleberry Finn was there,
with his dead cat. The boys moved off and disap-
peared in the gloom. At the end of half an hour they
were wading through the tall grass of the graveyard.

It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned Western
kind. It was on a hill, about a mile and a half from
the village. It had a crazy board fence around it,
which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest
of the time, but stood upright nowhere. Grass and
weeds grew rank over the whole cemetery. All the
old graves were sunken in, there was not a tombstone
on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards stag-
gered over the graves, leaning for support and finding
none. "Sacred to the memory of" So-and-So had been
painted on them once, but it could no longer have been
read, on the most of them, now, even if there had
been light.

A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom
feared it might be the spirits of the dead, complain-
ing at being disturbed. The boys talked little, and
only under their breath, for the time and the place
and the pervading solemnity and silence oppressed
their spirits. They found the sharp new heap they
were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the
protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch
within a few feet of the grave.

Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long
time. The hooting of a distant owl was all the sound
that troubled the dead stillness. Tom's reflections
grew oppressive. He must force some talk. So he
said in a whisper:

"Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for
us to be here?"

Huckleberry whispered:

"I wisht I knowed. It's awful solemn like, AIN'T it?"

"I bet it is."

There was a considerable pause, while the boys
canvassed this matter inwardly. Then Tom whis-
pered:

"Say, Hucky -- do you reckon Hoss Williams hears
us talking?"

"O' course he does. Least his sperrit does."

Tom, after a pause:

"I wish I'd said Mister Williams. But I never
meant any harm. Everybody calls him Hoss."

"A body can't be too partic'lar how they talk 'bout
these-yer dead people, Tom."

This was a damper, and conversation died again.

Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and said:

"Sh!"

"What is it, Tom?" And the two clung together
with beating hearts.

"Sh! There 'tis again! Didn't you hear it?"

"I --"

"There! Now you hear it."

"Lord, Tom, they're coming! They're coming,
sure. What'll we do?"

"I dono. Think they'll see us?"

"Oh, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats.
I wisht I hadn't come."

"Oh, don't be afeard. I don't believe they'll bother
us. We ain't doing any harm. If we keep perfectly
still, maybe they won't notice us at all."

"I'll try to, Tom, but, Lord, I'm all of a shiver."

"Listen!"

The boys bent their heads together and scarcely
breathed. A muffled sound of voices floated up from
the far end of the graveyard.

"Look! See there!" whispered Tom. "What is it?"

"It's devil-fire. Oh, Tom, this is awful."

Some vague figures approached through the gloom,
swinging an old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled
the ground with innumerable little spangles of light.
Presently Huckleberry whispered with a shudder:

"It's the devils sure enough. Three of 'em! Lordy,
Tom, we're goners! Can you pray?"

"I'll try, but don't you be afeard. They ain't going
to hurt us. 'Now I lay me down to sleep, I --'"

"Sh!"

"What is it, Huck?"

"They're HUMANS! One of 'em is, anyway. One
of 'em's old Muff Potter's voice."

"No -- 'tain't so, is it?"

"I bet I know it. Don't you stir nor budge. He
ain't sharp enough to notice us. Drunk, the same as
usual, likely -- blamed old rip!"

"All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck.
Can't find it. Here they come again. Now they're
hot. Cold again. Hot again. Red hot! They're
p'inted right, this time. Say, Huck, I know another
o' them voices; it's Injun Joe."

"That's so -- that murderin' half-breed! I'd druther
they was devils a dern sight. What kin they be up
to?"

The whisper died wholly out, now, for the three
men had reached the grave and stood within a few
feet of the boys' hiding-place.

"Here it is," said the third voice; and the owner
of it held the lantern up and revealed the face of young
Doctor Robinson.

Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow
with a rope and a couple of shovels on it. They cast
down their load and began to open the grave. The
doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came
and sat down with his back against one of the elm trees.
He was so close the boys could have touched him.

"Hurry, men!" he said, in a low voice; "the moon
might come out at any moment."

They growled a response and went on digging.
For some time there was no noise but the grating
sound of the spades discharging their freight of mould
and gravel. It was very monotonous. Finally a spade
struck upon the coffin with a dull woody accent, and
within another minute or two the men had hoisted it
out on the ground. They pried off the lid with their
shovels, got out the body and dumped it rudely on the
ground. The moon drifted from behind the clouds
and exposed the pallid face. The barrow was got ready
and the corpse placed on it, covered with a blanket,
and bound to its place with the rope. Potter took out
a large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the
rope and then said:

"Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and
you'll just out with another five, or here she stays."

"That's the talk!" said Injun Joe.

"Look here, what does this mean?" said the doctor.
"You required your pay in advance, and I've paid
you."

"Yes, and you done more than that," said Injun
Joe, approaching the doctor, who was now standing.
"Five years ago you drove me away from your father's
kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something
to eat, and you said I warn't there for any good; and
when I swore I'd get even with you if it took a hundred
years, your father had me jailed for a vagrant. Did
you think I'd forget? The Injun blood ain't in me for
nothing. And now I've GOT you, and you got to SETTLE,
you know!"

He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his
face, by this time. The doctor struck out suddenly and
stretched the ruffian on the ground. Potter dropped
his knife, and exclaimed:

"Here, now, don't you hit my pard!" and the next
moment he had grappled with the doctor and the two
were struggling with might and main, trampling the
grass and tearing the ground with their heels. Injun
Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion,
snatched up Potter's knife, and went creeping, catlike
and stooping, round and round about the combatants,
seeking an opportunity. All at once the doctor flung
himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams'
grave and felled Potter to the earth with it -- and in the
same instant the half-breed saw his chance and drove
the knife to the hilt in the young man's breast. He
reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him with his
blood, and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the
dreadful spectacle and the two frightened boys went
speeding away in the dark.

Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun
Joe was standing over the two forms, contemplating
them. The doctor murmured inarticulately, gave a
long gasp or two and was still. The half-breed mut-
tered:

"THAT score is settled -- damn you."

Then he robbed the body. After which he put
the fatal knife in Potter's open right hand, and sat
down on the dismantled coffin. Three -- four -- five
minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and
moan. His hand closed upon the knife; he raised
it, glanced at it, and let it fall, with a shudder. Then
he sat up, pushing the body from him, and gazed at it,
and then around him, confusedly. His eyes met Joe's.

"Lord, how is this, Joe?" he said.

"It's a dirty business," said Joe, without moving.

"What did you do it for?"

"I! I never done it!"

"Look here! That kind of talk won't wash."

Potter trembled and grew white.

"I thought I'd got sober. I'd no business to drink
to-night. But it's in my head yet -- worse'n when we
started here. I'm all in a muddle; can't recollect any-
thing of it, hardly. Tell me, Joe -- HONEST, now, old
feller -- did I do it? Joe, I never meant to -- 'pon my
soul and honor, I never meant to, Joe. Tell me how
it was, Joe. Oh, it's awful -- and him so young and
promising."

"Why, you two was scuffling, and he fetched you
one with the headboard and you fell flat; and then
up you come, all reeling and staggering like, and
snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as
he fetched you another awful clip -- and here you've
laid, as dead as a wedge til now."

"Oh, I didn't know what I was a-doing. I wish
I may die this minute if I did. It was all on account
of the whiskey and the excitement, I reckon. I never
used a weepon in my life before, Joe. I've fought, but
never with weepons. They'll all say that. Joe, don't
tell! Say you won't tell, Joe -- that's a good feller. I
always liked you, Joe, and stood up for you, too. Don't
you remember? You WON'T tell, WILL you, Joe?" And
the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid
murderer, and clasped his appealing hands.

"No, you've always been fair and square with me,
Muff Potter, and I won't go back on you. There, now,
that's as fair as a man can say."

"Oh, Joe, you're an angel. I'll bless you for this
the longest day I live." And Potter began to cry.

"Come, now, that's enough of that. This ain't any
time for blubbering. You be off yonder way and I'll
go this. Move, now, and don't leave any tracks be-
hind you."

Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a
run. The half-breed stood looking after him. He
muttered:

"If he's as much stunned with the lick and fud-
dled with the rum as he had the look of being, he
won't think of the knife till he's gone so far he'll be
afraid to come back after it to such a place by him-
self -- chicken-heart!"

Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the
blanketed corpse, the lidless coffin, and the open grave
were under no inspection but the moon's. The still-
ness was complete again, too.


CHAPTER X

THE two boys flew on and on, toward the
village, speechless with horror. They
glanced backward over their shoulders
from time to time, apprehensively, as
if they feared they might be followed.
Every stump that started up in their path
seemed a man and an enemy, and made them catch
their breath; and as they sped by some outlying cot-
tages that lay near the village, the barking of the
aroused watch-dogs seemed to give wings to their feet.

"If we can only get to the old tannery before we
break down!" whispered Tom, in short catches be-
tween breaths. "I can't stand it much longer."

Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply,
and the boys fixed their eyes on the goal of their hopes
and bent to their work to win it. They gained steadily
on it, and at last, breast to breast, they burst through
the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the
sheltering shadows beyond. By and by their pulses
slowed down, and Tom whispered:

"Huckleberry, what do you reckon'll come of this?"

"If Doctor Robinson dies, I reckon hanging'll come
of it."

"Do you though?"

"Why, I KNOW it, Tom."

Tom thought a while, then he said:

"Who'll tell? We?"

"What are you talking about? S'pose something
happened and Injun Joe DIDN'T hang? Why, he'd
kill us some time or other, just as dead sure as we're
a laying here."

"That's just what I was thinking to myself, Huck."

"If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool
enough. He's generally drunk enough."

Tom said nothing -- went on thinking. Presently
he whispered:

"Huck, Muff Potter don't know it. How can he
tell?"

"What's the reason he don't know it?"

"Because he'd just got that whack when Injun
Joe done it. D'you reckon he could see anything?
D'you reckon he knowed anything?"

"By hokey, that's so, Tom!"

"And besides, look-a-here -- maybe that whack done
for HIM!"

"No, 'taint likely, Tom. He had liquor in him;
I could see that; and besides, he always has. Well,
when pap's full, you might take and belt him over
the head with a church and you couldn't phase him.
He says so, his own self. So it's the same with Muff
Potter, of course. But if a man was dead sober,
I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I
dono."

After another reflective silence, Tom said:

"Hucky, you sure you can keep mum?"

"Tom, we GOT to keep mum. You know that.
That Injun devil wouldn't make any more of drownd-
ing us than a couple of cats, if we was to squeak 'bout
this and they didn't hang him. Now, look-a-here,
Tom, less take and swear to one another -- that's what
we got to do -- swear to keep mum."

"I'm agreed. It's the best thing. Would you
just hold hands and swear that we --"

"Oh no, that wouldn't do for this. That's good
enough for little rubbishy common things -- specially
with gals, cuz THEY go back on you anyway, and blab
if they get in a huff -- but there orter be writing 'bout
a big thing like this. And blood."

Tom's whole being applauded this idea. It was
deep, and dark, and awful; the hour, the circum-
stances, the surroundings, were in keeping with it.
He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moon-
light, took a little fragment of "red keel" out of his
pocket, got the moon on his work, and painfully scrawl-
ed these lines, emphasizing each slow down-stroke by
clamping his tongue between his teeth, and letting up
the pressure on the up-strokes. [See next page.]

   "Huck Finn and
    Tom Sawyer swears
    they will keep mum
    about This and They
    wish They may Drop
    down dead in Their
    Tracks if They ever
    Tell and Rot.

Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's
facility in writing, and the sublimity of his language.
He at once took a pin from his lapel and was going
to prick his flesh, but Tom said:

"Hold on! Don't do that. A pin's brass. It
might have verdigrease on it."

"What's verdigrease?"

"It's p'ison. That's what it is. You just swaller
some of it once -- you'll see."

So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles,
and each boy pricked the ball of his thumb and squeezed
out a drop of blood. In time, after many squeezes,
Tom managed to sign his initials, using the ball of his
little finger for a pen. Then he showed Huckleberry
how to make an H and an F, and the oath was com-
plete. They buried the shingle close to the wall, with
some dismal ceremonies and incantations, and the
fetters that bound their tongues were considered to be
locked and the key thrown away.

A figure crept stealthily through a break in the
other end of the ruined building, now, but they did
not notice it.

"Tom," whispered Huckleberry, "does this keep
us from EVER telling -- ALWAYS?"

"Of course it does. It don't make any difference
WHAT happens, we got to keep mum. We'd drop
down dead -- don't YOU know that?"

"Yes, I reckon that's so."

They continued to whisper for some little time.
Presently a dog set up a long, lugubrious howl just
outside -- within ten feet of them. The boys clasped
each other suddenly, in an agony of fright.

"Which of us does he mean?" gasped Huckle-
berry.

"I dono -- peep through the crack. Quick!"

"No, YOU, Tom!"

"I can't -- I can't DO it, Huck!"

"Please, Tom. There 'tis again!"

"Oh, lordy, I'm thankful!" whispered Tom. "I
know his voice. It's Bull Harbison." *

[* If Mr. Harbison owned a slave named Bull, Tom
would have spoken of him as "Harbison's Bull," but
a son or a dog of that name was "Bull Harbison."]

"Oh, that's good -- I tell you, Tom, I was most
scared to death; I'd a bet anything it was a STRAY dog."

The dog howled again. The boys' hearts sank
once more.

"Oh, my! that ain't no Bull Harbison!" whispered
Huckleberry. "DO, Tom!"

Tom, quaking with fear, yielded, and put his eye
to the crack. His whisper was hardly audible when
he said:

"Oh, Huck, IT S A STRAY DOG!"

"Quick, Tom, quick! Who does he mean?"

"Huck, he must mean us both -- we're right to-
gether."

"Oh, Tom, I reckon we're goners. I reckon there
ain't no mistake 'bout where I'LL go to. I been so
wicked."

"Dad fetch it! This comes of playing hookey and
doing everything a feller's told NOT to do. I might a
been good, like Sid, if I'd a tried -- but no, I wouldn't,
of course. But if ever I get off this time, I lay I'll just
WALLER in Sunday-schools!" And Tom began to snuffle
a little.

"YOU bad!" and Huckleberry began to snuffle too.
"Consound it, Tom Sawyer, you're just old pie, 'long-
side o' what I am. Oh, LORDY, lordy, lordy, I wisht I
only had half your chance."

Tom choked off and whispered:

"Look, Hucky, look! He's got his BACK to us!"

Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.

"Well, he has, by jingoes! Did he before?"

"Yes, he did. But I, like a fool, never thought.
Oh, this is bully, you know. NOW who can he mean?"

The howling stopped. Tom pricked up his ears.

"Sh! What's that?" he whispered.

"Sounds like -- like hogs grunting. No -- it's some-
body snoring, Tom."

"That IS it! Where 'bouts is it, Huck?"

"I bleeve it's down at 'tother end. Sounds so,
anyway. Pap used to sleep there, sometimes, 'long
with the hogs, but laws bless you, he just lifts things
when HE snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever com-
ing back to this town any more."

The spirit of adventure rose in the boys' souls once
more.

"Hucky, do you das't to go if I lead?"

"I don't like to, much. Tom, s'pose it's Injun Joe!"

Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose
up strong again and the boys agreed to try, with the
understanding that they would take to their heels if
the snoring stopped. So they went tiptoeing stealth-
ily down, the one behind the other. When they had
got to within five steps of the snorer, Tom stepped on
a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap. The man
moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the
moonlight. It was Muff Potter. The boys' hearts
had stood still, and their hopes too, when the man
moved, but their fears passed away now. They tip-
toed out, through the broken weather-boarding, and
stopped at a little distance to exchange a parting word.
That long, lugubrious howl rose on the night air again!
They turned and saw the strange dog standing within
a few feet of where Potter was lying, and FACING Potter,
with his nose pointing heavenward.

"Oh, geeminy, it's HIM!" exclaimed both boys, in a
breath.

"Say, Tom -- they say a stray dog come howling
around Johnny Miller's house, 'bout midnight, as
much as two weeks ago; and a whippoorwill come
in and lit on the banisters and sung, the very same
evening; and there ain't anybody dead there yet."

"Well, I know that. And suppose there ain't.
Didn't Gracie Miller fall in the kitchen fire and burn
herself terrible the very next Saturday?"

"Yes, but she ain't DEAD. And what's more, she's
getting better, too."

"All right, you wait and see. She's a goner, just
as dead sure as Muff Potter's a goner. That's what
the niggers say, and they know all about these kind
of things, Huck."

Then they separated, cogitating. When Tom crept
in at his bedroom window the night was almost spent.
He undressed with excessive caution, and fell asleep
congratulating himself that nobody knew of his esca-
pade. He was not aware that the gently-snoring Sid
was awake, and had been so for an hour.

When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone.
There was a late look in the light, a late sense in the
atmosphere. He was startled. Why had he not been
called -- persecuted till he was up, as usual? The
thought filled him with bodings. Within five minutes
he was dressed and down-stairs, feeling sore and
drowsy. The family were still at table, but they had
finished breakfast. There was no voice of rebuke;
but there were averted eyes; there was a silence and an
air of solemnity that struck a chill to the culprit's heart.
He sat down and tried to seem gay, but it was up-hill
work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed
into silence and let his heart sink down to the depths.

After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom
almost brightened in the hope that he was going to
be flogged; but it was not so. His aunt wept over
him and asked him how he could go and break her
old heart so; and finally told him to go on, and ruin
himself and bring her gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave, for it was no use for her to try any more. This
was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's
heart was sorer now than his body. He cried, he
pleaded for forgiveness, promised to reform over and
over again, and then received his dismissal, feeling that
he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established
but a feeble confidence.

He left the presence too miserable to even feel re-
vengeful toward Sid; and so the latter's prompt retreat
through the back gate was unnecessary. He moped
to school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging, along
with Joe Harper, for playing hookey the day before,
with the air of one whose heart was busy with heavier
woes and wholly dead to trifles. Then he betook him-
self to his seat, rested his elbows on his desk and his
jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony
stare of suffering that has reached the limit and can
no further go. His elbow was pressing against some
hard substance. After a long time he slowly and
sadly changed his position, and took up this object
with a sigh. It was in a paper. He unrolled it. A
long, lingering, colossal sigh followed, and his heart
broke. It was his brass andiron knob!

This final feather broke the camel's back.


CHAPTER XI

CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole
village was suddenly electrified with the
ghastly news. No need of the as yet un-
dreamed-of telegraph; the tale flew from
man to man, from group to group, from
house to house, with little less than tele-
graphic speed. Of course the schoolmaster gave holi-
day for that afternoon; the town would have thought
strangely of him if he had not.

A gory knife had been found close to the murdered
man, and it had been recognized by somebody as be-
longing to Muff Potter -- so the story ran. And it was
said that a belated citizen had come upon Potter wash-
ing himself in the "branch" about one or two o'clock
in the morning, and that Potter had at once sneaked
off -- suspicious circumstances, especially the washing
which was not a habit with Potter. It was also said
that the town had been ransacked for this "murderer"
(the public are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence
and arriving at a verdict), but that he could not be
found. Horsemen had departed down all the roads
in every direction, and the Sheriff "was confident"
that he would be captured before night.

All the town was drifting toward the graveyard.
Tom's heartbreak vanished and he joined the pro-
cession, not because he would not a thousand times
rather go anywhere else, but because an awful, un-
accountable fascination drew him on. Arrived at the
dreadful place, he wormed his small body through
the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle. It seemed
to him an age since he was there before. Somebody
pinched his arm. He turned, and his eyes met Huckle-
berry's. Then both looked elsewhere at once, and
wondered if anybody had noticed anything in their
mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and intent
upon the grisly spectacle before them.

"Poor fellow!" "Poor young fellow!" "This ought
to be a lesson to grave robbers!" "Muff Potter'll hang
for this if they catch him!" This was the drift of re-
mark; and the minister said, "It was a judgment; His
hand is here."

Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye
fell upon the stolid face of Injun Joe. At this moment
the crowd began to sway and struggle, and voices
shouted, "It's him! it's him! he's coming himself!"

"Who? Who?" from twenty voices.

"Muff Potter!"

"Hallo, he's stopped! -- Look out, he's turning!
Don't let him get away!"

People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head
said he wasn't trying to get away -- he only looked
doubtful and perplexed.

"Infernal impudence!" said a bystander; "wanted
to come and take a quiet look at his work, I reckon --
didn't expect any company."

The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sheriff came
through, ostentatiously leading Potter by the arm.
The poor fellow's face was haggard, and his eyes
showed the fear that was upon him. When he stood
before the murdered man, he shook as with a palsy,
and he put his face in his hands and burst into tears.

"I didn't do it, friends," he sobbed; "'pon my word
and honor I never done it."

"Who's accused you?" shouted a voice.

This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his
face and looked around him with a pathetic hope-
lessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joe, and exclaimed:

"Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you'd never --"

"Is that your knife?" and it was thrust before him
by the Sheriff.

Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him
and eased him to the ground. Then he said:

"Something told me 't if I didn't come back and
get --" He shuddered; then waved his nerveless hand
with a vanquished gesture and said, "Tell 'em, Joe,
tell 'em -- it ain't any use any more."

Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and star-
ing, and heard the stony-hearted liar reel off his se-
rene statement, they expecting every moment that the
clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his head,
and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed.
And when he had finished and still stood alive and
whole, their wavering impulse to break their oath and
save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and vanished
away, for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to
Satan and it would be fatal to meddle with the property
of such a power as that.

"Why didn't you leave? What did you want to
come here for?" somebody said.

"I couldn't help it -- I couldn't help it," Potter
moaned. "I wanted to run away, but I couldn't seem
to come anywhere but here." And he fell to sobbing
again.

Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly,
a few minutes afterward on the inquest, under oath;
and the boys, seeing that the lightnings were still
withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe had
sold himself to the devil. He was now become, to
them, the most balefully interesting object they had
ever looked upon, and they could not take their fas-
cinated eyes from his face.

They inwardly resolved to watch him nights, when
opportunity should offer, in the hope of getting a glimpse
of his dread master.

Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered
man and put it in a wagon for removal; and it was
whispered through the shuddering crowd that the
wound bled a little! The boys thought that this happy
circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction;
but they were disappointed, for more than one villager
remarked:

"It was within three feet of Muff Potter when it
done it."

Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience dis-
turbed his sleep for as much as a week after this; and
at breakfast one morning Sid said:

"Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so
much that you keep me awake half the time."

Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.

"It's a bad sign," said Aunt Polly, gravely. "What
you got on your mind, Tom?"

"Nothing. Nothing 't I know of." But the boy's
hand shook so that he spilled his coffee.

"And you do talk such stuff," Sid said. "Last
night you said, 'It's blood, it's blood, that's what it is!'
You said that over and over. And you said, 'Don't
torment me so -- I'll tell!' Tell WHAT? What is it you'll
tell?"

Everything was swimming before Tom. There is
no telling what might have happened, now, but luckily
the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face and she
came to Tom's relief without knowing it. She said:

"Sho! It's that dreadful murder. I dream about
it most every night myself. Sometimes I dream it's
me that done it."

Mary said she had been affected much the same
way. Sid seemed satisfied. Tom got out of the
presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after that
he complained of toothache for a week, and tied up
his jaws every night. He never knew that Sid lay
nightly watching, and frequently slipped the bandage
free and then leaned on his elbow listening a good while
at a time, and afterward slipped the bandage back to
its place again. Tom's distress of mind wore off
gradually and the toothache grew irksome and was
discarded. If Sid really managed to make anything
out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to him-
self.

It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would
get done holding inquests on dead cats, and thus
keeping his trouble present to his mind. Sid noticed
that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries,
though it had been his habit to take the lead in all
new enterprises; he noticed, too, that Tom never acted
as a witness -- and that was strange; and Sid did not
overlook the fact that Tom even showed a marked
aversion to these inquests, and always avoided them
when he could. Sid marvelled, but said nothing. How-
ever, even inquests went out of vogue at last, and ceased
to torture Tom's conscience.

Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom
watched his opportunity and went to the little grated
jail-window and smuggled such small comforts through
to the "murderer" as he could get hold of. The jail
was a trifling little brick den that stood in a marsh at
the edge of the village, and no guards were afforded for
it; indeed, it was seldom occupied. These offerings
greatly helped to ease Tom's conscience.

The villagers had a strong desire to tar-and-feather
Injun Joe and ride him on a rail, for body-snatching,
but so formidable was his character that nobody could
be found who was willing to take the lead in the matter,
so it was dropped. He had been careful to begin both
of his inquest-statements with the fight, without con-
fessing the grave-robbery that preceded it; therefore
it was deemed wisest not to try the case in the courts
at present.


CHAPTER XII

ONE of the reasons why Tom's mind had
drifted away from its secret troubles was,
that it had found a new and weighty
matter to interest itself about. Becky
Thatcher had stopped coming to school.
Tom had struggled with his pride a few
days, and tried to "whistle her down the wind," but
failed. He began to find himself hanging around her
father's house, nights, and feeling very miserable. She
was ill. What if she should die! There was dis-
traction in the thought. He no longer took an interest
in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was
gone; there was nothing but dreariness left. He put
his hoop away, and his bat; there was no joy in them
any more. His aunt was concerned. She began to try
all manner of remedies on him. She was one of those
people who are infatuated with patent medicines and
all new-fangled methods of producing health or mending
it. She was an inveterate experimenter in these things.
When something fresh in this line came out she was in a
fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was
never ailing, but on anybody else that came handy.
She was a subscriber for all the "Health" periodicals
and phrenological frauds; and the solemn ignorance
they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils.
All the "rot" they contained about ventilation, and
how to go to bed, and how to get up, and what to
eat, and what to drink, and how much exercise to
take, and what frame of mind to keep one's self in,
and what sort of clothing to wear, was all gospel to
her, and she never observed that her health-journals
of the current month customarily upset everything
they had recommended the month before. She was
as simple-hearted and honest as the day was long,
and so she was an easy victim. She gathered together
her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and
thus armed with death, went about on her pale horse,
metaphorically speaking, with "hell following after."
But she never suspected that she was not an angel of
healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the
suffering neighbors.

The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low
condition was a windfall to her. She had him out at
daylight every morning, stood him up in the wood-
shed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water;
then she scrubbed him down with a towel like a
file, and so brought him to; then she rolled him
up in a wet sheet and put him away under blank-
ets till she sweated his soul clean and "the yel-
low stains of it came through his pores" -- as Tom
said.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more
and more melancholy and pale and dejected. She
added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths, and plunges.
The boy remained as dismal as a hearse. She began
to assist the water with a slim oatmeal diet and blister-
plasters. She calculated his capacity as she would a
jug's, and filled him up every day with quack cure-alls.

Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this
time. This phase filled the old lady's heart with
consternation. This indifference must be broken up
at any cost. Now she heard of Pain-killer for the
first time. She ordered a lot at once. She tasted it
and was filled with gratitude. It was simply fire in a
liquid form. She dropped the water treatment and
everything else, and pinned her faith to Pain-killer.
She gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with the
deepest anxiety for the result. Her troubles were in-
stantly at rest, her soul at peace again; for the "in-
difference" was broken up. The boy could not have
shown a wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a fire
under him.

Tom felt that it was time to wake up; this sort of
life might be romantic enough, in his blighted con-
dition, but it was getting to have too little sentiment
and too much distracting variety about it. So he
thought over various plans for relief, and finally hit
pon that of professing to be fond of Pain-killer. He
asked for it so often that he became a nuisance, and
his aunt ended by telling him to help himself and quit
bothering her. If it had been Sid, she would have had
no misgivings to alloy her delight; but since it was Tom,
she watched the bottle clandestinely. She found that
the medicine did really diminish, but it did not occur
to her that the boy was mending the health of a crack
in the sitting-room floor with it.

One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack
when his aunt's yellow cat came along, purring, ey-
ing the teaspoon avariciously, and begging for a taste.
Tom said:

"Don't ask for it unless you want it, Peter."

But Peter signified that he did want it.

"You better make sure."

Peter was sure.

"Now you've asked for it, and I'll give it to you,
because there ain't anything mean about me; but
if you find you don't like it, you mustn't blame any-
body but your own self."

Peter was agreeable. So Tom pried his mouth
open and poured down the Pain-killer. Peter sprang
a couple of yards in the air, and then delivered a
war-whoop and set off round and round the room,
banging against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and
making general havoc. Next he rose on his hind
feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of enjoyment,
with his head over his shoulder and his voice pro-
claiming his unappeasable happiness. Then he went
tearing around the house again spreading chaos and
destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered in time
to see him throw a few double summersets, deliver a
final mighty hurrah, and sail through the open window,
carrying the rest of the flower-pots with him. The
old lady stood petrified with astonishment, peering
over her glasses; Tom lay on the floor expiring with
laughter.

"Tom, what on earth ails that cat?"

"I don't know, aunt," gasped the boy.

"Why, I never see anything like it. What did make
him act so?"

"Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly; cats always act
so when they're having a good time."

"They do, do they?" There was something in the
tone that made Tom apprehensive.

"Yes'm. That is, I believe they do."

"You DO?"

"Yes'm."

The old lady was bending down, Tom watching,
with interest emphasized by anxiety. Too late he
divined her "drift." The handle of the telltale tea-
spoon was visible under the bed-valance. Aunt Polly
took it, held it up. Tom winced, and dropped his eyes.
Aunt Polly raised him by the usual handle -- his ear --
and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.

"Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor
dumb beast so, for?"

"I done it out of pity for him -- because he hadn't
any aunt."

"Hadn't any aunt! -- you numskull. What has that
got to do with it?"

"Heaps. Because if he'd had one she'd a burnt
him out herself! She'd a roasted his bowels out of him
'thout any more feeling than if he was a human!"

Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This
was putting the thing in a new light; what was cruelty
to a cat MIGHT be cruelty to a boy, too. She began to
soften; she felt sorry. Her eyes watered a little, and
she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently:

"I was meaning for the best, Tom. And, Tom, it
DID do you good."

Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible
twinkle peeping through his gravity.

"I know you was meaning for the best, aunty, and
so was I with Peter. It done HIM good, too. I never
see him get around so since --"

"Oh, go 'long with you, Tom, before you aggravate
me again. And you try and see if you can't be a good
boy, for once, and you needn't take any more medicine."

Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed
that this strange thing had been occurring every day
latterly. And now, as usual of late, he hung about
the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his
comrades. He was sick, he said, and he looked it.
He tried to seem to be looking everywhere but whither
he really was looking -- down the road. Presently
Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted;
he gazed a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away.
When Jeff arrived, Tom accosted him; and "led up"
warily to opportunities for remark about Becky, but
the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched
and watched, hoping whenever a frisking frock came in
sight, and hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she
was not the right one. At last frocks ceased to appear,
and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered
the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer. Then
one more frock passed in at the gate, and Tom's heart
gave a great bound. The next instant he was out,
and "going on" like an Indian; yelling, laughing,
chasing boys, jumping over the fence at risk of life and
limb, throwing handsprings, standing on his head --
doing all the heroic things he could conceive of, and
keeping a furtive eye out, all the while, to see if Becky
Thatcher was noticing. But she seemed to be un-
conscious of it all; she never looked. Could it be
possible that she was not aware that he was there?
He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came
war-whooping around, snatched a boy's cap, hurled it
to the roof of the schoolhouse, broke through a group
of boys, tumbling them in every direction, and fell
sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost upsetting
her -- and she turned, with her nose in the air, and he
heard her say: "Mf! some people think they're mighty
smart -- always showing off!"

Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and
sneaked off, crushed and crestfallen.


CHAPTER XIII

TOM'S mind was made up now. He was
gloomy and desperate. He was a for-
saken, friendless boy, he said; nobody
loved him; when they found out what they
had driven him to, perhaps they would
be sorry; he had tried to do right and get
along, but they would not let him; since nothing would
do them but to be rid of him, let it be so; and let them
blame HIM for the consequences -- why shouldn't they?
What right had the friendless to complain? Yes, they
had forced him to it at last: he would lead a life of crime.
There was no choice.

By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and
the bell for school to "take up" tinkled faintly upon his
ear. He sobbed, now, to think he should never, never
hear that old familiar sound any more -- it was very
hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out
into the cold world, he must submit -- but he forgave
them. Then the sobs came thick and fast.

Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade,
Joe Harper -- hard-eyed, and with evidently a great
and dismal purpose in his heart. Plainly here were
"two souls with but a single thought." Tom, wiping
his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something
about a resolution to escape from hard usage and lack
of sympathy at home by roaming abroad into the great
world never to return; and ended by hoping that Joe
would not forget him.

But it transpired that this was a request which Joe
had just been going to make of Tom, and had come
to hunt him up for that purpose. His mother had
whipped him for drinking some cream which he had
never tasted and knew nothing about; it was plain
that she was tired of him and wished him to go; if
she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but
succumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never
regret having driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling
world to suffer and die.

As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they
made a new compact to stand by each other and be
brothers and never separate till death relieved them
of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans.
Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a
remote cave, and dying, some time, of cold and want
and grief; but after listening to Tom, he conceded that
there were some conspicuous advantages about a life
of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate.

Three miles below St. Petersburg, at a point where
the Mississippi River was a trifle over a mile wide,
there was a long, narrow, wooded island, with a shallow
bar at the head of it, and this offered well as a ren-
dezvous. It was not inhabited; it lay far over toward
the further shore, abreast a dense and almost wholly
unpeopled forest. So Jackson's Island was chosen.
Who were to be the subjects of their piracies was a
matter that did not occur to them. Then they hunted
up Huckleberry Finn, and he joined them promptly,
for all careers were one to him; he was indifferent.
They presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on
the river-bank two miles above the village at the favorite
hour -- which was midnight. There was a small log
raft there which they meant to capture. Each would
bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he could
steal in the most dark and mysterious way -- as became
outlaws. And before the afternoon was done, they
had all managed to enjoy the sweet glory of spreading
the fact that pretty soon the town would "hear some-
thing." All who got this vague hint were cautioned to
"be mum and wait."

About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham
and a few trifles, and stopped in a dense undergrowth
on a small bluff overlooking the meeting-place. It
was starlight, and very still. The mighty river lay
like an ocean at rest. Tom listened a moment, but no
sound disturbed the quiet. Then he gave a low,
distinct whistle. It was answered from under the
bluff. Tom whistled twice more; these signals were
answered in the same way. Then a guarded voice
said:

"Who goes there?"

"Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish
Main. Name your names."

"Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the
Terror of the Seas." Tom had furnished these titles,
from his favorite literature.

"'Tis well. Give the countersign."

Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word
simultaneously to the brooding night:

"BLOOD!"

Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let
himself down after it, tearing both skin and clothes
to some extent in the effort. There was an easy, com-
fortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it
lacked the advantages of difficulty and danger so val-
ued by a pirate.

The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon,
and had about worn himself out with getting it there.
Finn the Red-Handed had stolen a skillet and a quan-
tity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought a
few corn-cobs to make pipes with. But none of the
pirates smoked or "chewed" but himself. The Black
Avenger of the Spanish Main said it would never do to
start without some fire. That was a wise thought;
matches were hardly known there in that day. They
saw a fire smouldering upon a great raft a hundred
yards above, and they went stealthily thither and helped
themselves to a chunk. They made an imposing ad-
venture of it, saying, "Hist!" every now and then, and
suddenly halting with finger on lip; moving with hands
on imaginary dagger-hilts; and giving orders in dismal
whispers that if "the foe" stirred, to "let him have it
to the hilt," because "dead men tell no tales." They
knew well enough that the raftsmen were all down at
the village laying in stores or having a spree, but still
that was no excuse for their conducting this thing in an
unpiratical way.

They shoved off, presently, Tom in command, Huck
at the after oar and Joe at the forward. Tom stood
amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded arms, and
gave his orders in a low, stern whisper:

"Luff, and bring her to the wind!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Steady, steady-y-y-y!"

"Steady it is, sir!"

"Let her go off a point!"

"Point it is, sir!"

As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the
raft toward mid-stream it was no doubt under-
stood that these orders were given only for "style,"
and were not intended to mean anything in par-
ticular.

"What sail's she carrying?"

"Courses, tops'ls, and flying-jib, sir."

"Send the r'yals up! Lay out aloft, there, half a
dozen of ye -- foretopmaststuns'l! Lively, now!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Shake out that maintogalans'l! Sheets and braces!
NOW my hearties!"

"Aye-aye, sir!"

"Hellum-a-lee -- hard a port! Stand by to meet
her when she comes! Port, port! NOW, men! With
a will! Stead-y-y-y!"

"Steady it is, sir!"

The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the
boys pointed her head right, and then lay on their
oars. The river was not high, so there was not more
than a two or three mile current. Hardly a word was
said during the next three-quarters of an hour. Now
the raft was passing before the distant town. Two or
three glimmering lights showed where it lay, peacefully
sleeping, beyond the vague vast sweep of star-gemmed
water, unconscious of the tremendous event that was
happening. The Black Avenger stood still with folded
arms, "looking his last" upon the scene of his former
joys and his later sufferings, and wishing "she" could
see him now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and
death with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a
grim smile on his lips. It was but a small strain on his
imagination to remove Jackson's Island beyond eye-
shot of the village, and so he "looked his last" with a
broken and satisfied heart. The other pirates were
looking their last, too; and they all looked so long
that they came near letting the current drift them out
of the range of the island. But they discovered the
danger in time, and made shift to avert it. About two
o'clock in the morning the raft grounded on the bar
two hundred yards above the head of the island, and
they waded back and forth until they had landed their
freight. Part of the little raft's belongings consisted
of an old sail, and this they spread over a nook in the
bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions; but they
themselves would sleep in the open air in good weather,
as became outlaws.

They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty
or thirty steps within the sombre depths of the forest,
and then cooked some bacon in the frying-pan for sup-
per, and used up half of the corn "pone" stock they had
brought. It seemed glorious sport to be feasting in
that wild, free way in the virgin forest of an unex-
plored and uninhabited island, far from the haunts of
men, and they said they never would return to civiliza-
tion. The climbing fire lit up their faces and threw its
ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of their forest
temple, and upon the varnished foliage and festooning
vines.

When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the
last allowance of corn pone devoured, the boys stretched
themselves out on the grass, filled with contentment.
They could have found a cooler place, but they would
not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the
roasting camp-fire.

"AIN'T it gay?" said Joe.

"It's NUTS!" said Tom. "What would the boys say
if they could see us?"

"Say? Well, they'd just die to be here -- hey,
Hucky!"

"I reckon so," said Huckleberry; "anyways, I'm
suited. I don't want nothing better'n this. I don't
ever get enough to eat, gen'ally -- and here they can't
come and pick at a feller and bullyrag him so."

"It's just the life for me," said Tom. "You don't
have to get up, mornings, and you don't have to go to
school, and wash, and all that blame foolishness. You
see a pirate don't have to do ANYTHING, Joe, when he's
ashore, but a hermit HE has to be praying considerable,
and then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself
that way."

"Oh yes, that's so," said Joe, "but I hadn't thought
much about it, you know. I'd a good deal rather be a
pirate, now that I've tried it."

"You see," said Tom, "people don't go much on
hermits, nowadays, like they used to in old times, but
a pirate's always respected. And a hermit's got to
sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put sackcloth
and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and --"

"What does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head
for?" inquired Huck.

"I dono. But they've GOT to do it. Hermits always
do. You'd have to do that if you was a hermit."

"Dern'd if I would," said Huck.

"Well, what would you do?"

"I dono. But I wouldn't do that."

"Why, Huck, you'd HAVE to. How'd you get around
it?"

"Why, I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away."

"Run away! Well, you WOULD be a nice old slouch
of a hermit. You'd be a disgrace."

The Red-Handed made no response, being better
employed. He had finished gouging out a cob, and
now he fitted a weed stem to it, loaded it with tobacco,
and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a
cloud of fragrant smoke -- he was in the full bloom of
