ch
were owned and occupied by two old knights who were
twin brothers, and bachelors.  They had no relatives.
They were very rich.  They had fought through the wars
and retired to private life--covered with honorable scars.
They were honest, honorable men in their dealings,
but the people had given them a couple of nicknames which
were very suggestive--Herr Givenaught and Herr Heartless.
The old knights were so proud of these names that if
a burgher called them by their right ones they would
correct them.

The most renowned scholar in Europe, at the time, was the
Herr Doctor Franz Reikmann, who lived in Heidelberg.
All Germany was proud of the venerable scholar, who lived
in the simplest way, for great scholars are always poor.
He was poor, as to money, but very rich in his sweet
young daughter Hildegarde and his library.  He had been
all his life collecting his library, book and book,
and he lived it as a miser loves his hoarded gold.
He said the two strings of his heart were rooted,
the one in his daughter, the other in his books; and that
if either were severed he must die.  Now in an evil hour,
hoping to win a marriage portion for his child, this simple
old man had entrusted his small savings to a sharper to be
ventured in a glittering speculation.  But that was not
the worst of it: he signed a paper--without reading it.
That is the way with poets and scholars; they always sign
without reading.  This cunning paper made him responsible
for heaps of things.  The rest was that one night he
found himself in debt to the sharper eight thousand
pieces of gold!--an amount so prodigious that it simply
stupefied him to think of it.  It was a night of woe in
that house.

"I must part with my library--I have nothing else.
So perishes one heartstring," said the old man.

"What will it bring, father?" asked the girl.

"Nothing! It is worth seven hundred pieces of gold;
but by auction it will go for little or nothing."

"Then you will have parted with the half of your heart
and the joy of your life to no purpose, since so mighty
of burden of debt will remain behind."

"There is no help for it, my child.  Our darlings must
pass under the hammer.  We must pay what we can."

"My father, I have a feeling that the dear Virgin will
come to our help.  Let us not lose heart."

"She cannot devise a miracle that will turn NOTHING into
eight thousand gold pieces, and lesser help will bring
us little peace."

"She can do even greater things, my father.  She will
save us, I know she will."

Toward morning, while the old man sat exhausted and asleep
in his chair where he had been sitting before his books
as one who watches by his beloved dead and prints the
features on his memory for a solace in the aftertime
of empty desolation, his daughter sprang into the room
and gently woke him, saying--

"My presentiment was true! She will save us.
Three times has she appeared to me in my dreams, and said,
'Go to the Herr Givenaught, go to the Herr Heartless,
ask them to come and bid.' There, did I not tell you she
would save us, the thrice blessed Virgin!"

Sad as the old man was, he was obliged to laugh.

"Thou mightest as well appeal to the rocks their
castles stand upon as to the harder ones that lie
in those men's breasts, my child.  THEY bid on books
writ in the learned tongues!--they can scarce read their own."

But Hildegarde's faith was in no wise shaken.
Bright and early she was on her way up the Neckar road,
as joyous as a bird.

Meantime Herr Givenaught and Herr Heartless were having
an early breakfast in the former's castle--the Sparrow's
Nest--and flavoring it with a quarrel; for although
these twins bore a love for each other which almost
amounted to worship, there was one subject upon which they
could not touch without calling each other hard names--
and yet it was the subject which they oftenest touched upon.

"I tell you," said Givenaught, "you will beggar yourself
yet with your insane squanderings of money upon
what you choose to consider poor and worthy objects.
All these years I have implored you to stop this foolish
custom and husband your means, but all in vain.
You are always lying to me about these secret benevolences,
but you never have managed to deceive me yet.  Every time
a poor devil has been set upon his feet I have detected
your hand in it--incorrigible ass!"

"Every time you didn't set him on his feet yourself,
you mean.  Where I give one unfortunate a little private lift,
you do the same for a dozen.  The idea of YOUR swelling
around the country and petting yourself with the nickname
of Givenaught--intolerable humbug! Before I would be
such a fraud as that, I would cut my right hand off.
Your life is a continual lie.  But go on, I have tried MY
best to save you from beggaring yourself by your riotous
charities--now for the thousandth time I wash my hands
of the consequences.  A maundering old fool! that's
what you are."

"And you a blethering old idiot!" roared Givenaught,
springing up.

"I won't stay in the presence of a man who has no more
delicacy than to call me such names.  Mannerless swine!"

So saying, Herr Heartless sprang up in a passion.
But some lucky accident intervened, as usual, to change
the subject, and the daily quarrel ended in the customary
daily living reconciliation.  The gray-headed old
eccentrics parted, and Herr Heartless walked off to his
own castle.

Half an hour later, Hildegarde was standing in the presence
of Herr Givenaught.  He heard her story, and said--

"I am sorry for you, my child, but I am very poor,
I care nothing for bookish rubbish, I shall not be there."

He said the hard words kindly, but they nearly broke poor
Hildegarde's heart, nevertheless.  When she was gone
the old heartbreaker muttered, rubbing his hands--

"It was a good stroke.  I have saved my brother's pocket
this time, in spite of him.  Nothing else would have
prevented his rushing off to rescue the old scholar,
the pride of Germany, from his trouble.  The poor child
won't venture near HIM after the rebuff she has received
from his brother the Givenaught."

But he was mistaken.  The Virgin had commanded,
and Hildegarde would obey.  She went to Herr Heartless
and told her story.  But he said coldly--

"I am very poor, my child, and books are nothing to me.
I wish you well, but I shall not come."

When Hildegarde was gone, he chuckled and said--

"How my fool of a soft-headed soft-hearted brother would
rage if he knew how cunningly I have saved his pocket.
How he would have flown to the old man's rescue! But the
girl won't venture near him now."

When Hildegarde reached home, her father asked her how she
had prospered.  She said--

"The Virgin has promised, and she will keep her word;
but not in the way I thought.  She knows her own ways,
and they are best."

The old man patted her on the head, and smiled a doubting
smile, but he honored her for her brave faith, nevertheless.

II

Next day the people assembled in the great hall
of the Ritter tavern, to witness the auction--for
the proprietor had said the treasure of Germany's most
honored son should be bartered away in no meaner place.
Hildegarde and her father sat close to the books,
silent and sorrowful, and holding each other's hands.
There was a great crowd of people present.  The bidding began--

"How much for this precious library, just as it stands,
all complete?" called the auctioneer.

"Fifty pieces of gold!"

"A hundred!"

"Two hundred."

"Three!"

"Four!"

"Five hundred!"

"Five twenty-five."

A brief pause.

"Five forty!"

A longer pause, while the auctioneer redoubled his persuasions.

"Five-forty-five!"

A heavy drag--the auctioneer persuaded, pleaded,
implored--it was useless, everybody remained silent--

"Well, then--going, going--one--two--"

"Five hundred and fifty!"

This in a shrill voice, from a bent old man, all hung
with rags, and with a green patch over his left eye.
Everybody in his vicinity turned and gazed at him.
It was Givenaught in disguise.  He was using a disguised
voice, too.

"Good!" cried the auctioneer.  "Going, going--one--two--"

"Five hundred and sixty!"

This, in a deep, harsh voice, from the midst of the
crowd at the other end of the room.  The people near
by turned, and saw an old man, in a strange costume,
supporting himself on crutches.  He wore a long white beard,
and blue spectacles.  It was Herr Heartless, in disguise,
and using a disguised voice.

"Good again! Going, going--one--"

"Six hundred!"

Sensation.  The crowd raised a cheer, and some one
cried out, "Go it, Green-patch!" This tickled the audience
and a score of voices shouted, "Go it, Green-patch!"

"Going--going--going--third and last call--one--two--"

"Seven hundred!"

"Huzzah!--well done, Crutches!" cried a voice.  The crowd
took it up, and shouted altogether, "Well done, Crutches!"

"Splendid, gentlemen! you are doing magnificently.
Going, going--"

"A thousand!"

"Three cheers for Green-patch! Up and at him, Crutches!"

"Going--going--"

"Two thousand!"

And while the people cheered and shouted, "Crutches" muttered,
"Who can this devil be that is fighting so to get these
useless books?--But no matter, he sha'n't have them.
The pride of Germany shall have his books if it beggars
me to buy them for him."

"Going, going, going--"

"Three thousand!"

"Come, everybody--give a rouser for Green-patch!"

And while they did it, "Green-patch" muttered, "This cripple
is plainly a lunatic; but the old scholar shall have
his books, nevertheless, though my pocket sweat for it."

"Going--going--"

"Four thousand!"

"Huzza!"

"Five thousand!"

"Huzza!"

"Six thousand!"

"Huzza!"

"Seven thousand!"

"Huzza!"

"EIGHT thousand!"

"We are saved, father! I told you the Holy Virgin
would keep her word!" "Blessed be her sacred name!"
said the old scholar, with emotion.  The crowd roared,
"Huzza, huzza, huzza--at him again, Green-patch!"

"Going--going--"

"TEN thousand!" As Givenaught shouted this, his excitement
was so great that he forgot himself and used his
natural voice.  He brother recognized it, and muttered,
under cover of the storm of cheers--

"Aha, you are there, are you, besotted old fool? Take
the books, I know what you'll do with them!"

So saying, he slipped out of the place and the auction was
at an end.  Givenaught shouldered his way to Hildegarde,
whispered a word in her ear, and then he also vanished.
The old scholar and his daughter embraced, and the former said,
"Truly the Holy Mother has done more than she promised,
child, for she has give you a splendid marriage portion--
think of it, two thousand pieces of gold!"

"And more still," cried Hildegarde, "for she has give
you back your books; the stranger whispered me that he
would none of them--'the honored son of Germany must
keep them,' so he said.  I would I might have asked
his name and kissed his hand and begged his blessing;
but he was Our Lady's angel, and it is not meet that we
of earth should venture speech with them that dwell above."



APPENDIX F
German Journals

The daily journals of Hamburg, Frankfort, Baden, Munich,
and Augsburg are all constructed on the same general plan.
I speak of these because I am more familiar with them
than with any other German papers.  They contain no
"editorials" whatever; no "personals"--and this is rather
a merit than a demerit, perhaps; no funny-paragraph column;
no police-court reports; no reports of proceedings
of higher courts; no information about prize-fights
or other dog-fights, horse-races, walking-machines,
yachting-contents, rifle-matches, or other sporting
matters of any sort; no reports of banquet speeches;
no department of curious odds and ends of floating fact
and gossip; no "rumors" about anything or anybody;
no prognostications or prophecies about anything or anybody;
no lists of patents granted or sought, or any reference
to such things; no abuse of public officials, big or little,
or complaints against them, or praises of them; no religious
columns Saturdays, no rehash of cold sermons Mondays;
no "weather indications"; no "local item" unveiling of
what is happening in town--nothing of a local nature,
indeed, is mentioned, beyond the movements of some prince,
or the proposed meeting of some deliberative body.

After so formidable a list of what one can't find
in a German daily, the question may well be asked,
What CAN be found in it? It is easily answered: A child's
handful of telegrams, mainly about European national and
international political movements; letter-correspondence about
the same things; market reports.  There you have it.
That is what a German daily is made of.  A German
daily is the slowest and saddest and dreariest of the
inventions of man.  Our own dailies infuriate the reader,
pretty often; the German daily only stupefies him.
Once a week the German daily of the highest class lightens
up its heavy columns--that is, it thinks it lightens
them up--with a profound, an abysmal, book criticism;
a criticism which carries you down, down, down into
the scientific bowels of the subject--for the German
critic is nothing if not scientific--and when you come
up at last and scent the fresh air and see the bonny
daylight once more, you resolve without a dissenting voice
that a book criticism is a mistaken way to lighten up
a German daily.  Sometimes, in place of the criticism,
the first-class daily gives you what it thinks is a gay
and chipper essay--about ancient Grecian funeral customs,
or the ancient Egyptian method of tarring a mummy,
or the reasons for believing that some of the peoples
who existed before the flood did not approve of cats.
These are not unpleasant subjects; they are not
uninteresting subjects; they are even exciting subjects--
until one of these massive scientists gets hold of them.
He soon convinces you that even these matters can
be handled in such a way as to make a person low-spirited.

As I have said, the average German daily is made up
solely of correspondences--a trifle of it by telegraph,
the rest of it by mail.  Every paragraph has the side-head,
"London," "Vienna," or some other town, and a date.
And always, before the name of the town, is placed a letter
or a sign, to indicate who the correspondent is, so that
the authorities can find him when they want to hang him.
Stars, crosses, triangles, squares, half-moons, suns--
such are some of the signs used by correspondents.

Some of the dailies move too fast, others too slowly.
For instance, my Heidelberg daily was always twenty-four
hours old when it arrived at the hotel; but one of my
Munich evening papers used to come a full twenty-four hours
before it was due.

Some of the less important dailies give one a tablespoonful
of a continued story every day; it is strung across
the bottom of the page, in the French fashion.
By subscribing for the paper for five years I judge that
a man might succeed in getting pretty much all of the story.

If you ask a citizen of Munich which is the best Munich
daily journal, he will always tell you that there is
only one good Munich daily, and that it is published
in Augsburg, forty or fifty miles away.  It is like saying
that the best daily paper in New York is published out
in New Jersey somewhere.  Yes, the Augsburg ALLGEMEINE
ZEITUNG is "the best Munich paper," and it is the one I
had in my mind when I was describing a "first-class
German daily" above.  The entire paper, opened out, is not
quite as large as a single page of the New York HERALD.
It is printed on both sides, of course; but in such large
type that its entire contents could be put, in HERALD type,
upon a single page of the HERALD--and there would still
be room enough on the page for the ZEITUNG's "supplement"
and some portion of the ZEITUNG's next day's contents.

Such is the first-class daily.  The dailies actually printed
in Munich are all called second-class by the public.
If you ask which is the best of these second-class
papers they say there is no difference; one is as good
as another.  I have preserved a copy of one of them;
it is called the MU"NCHENER TAGES-ANZEIGER, and bears
date January 25, 1879.  Comparisons are odious,
but they need not be malicious; and without any malice
I wish to compare this journals of other countries.
I know of no other way to enable the reader to "size"
the thing.

A column of an average daily paper in America contains
from 1,800 to 2,500 words; the reading-matter in a
single issue consists of from 25,000 to 50,000 words.
The reading-matter in my copy of the Munich journal
consists of a total of 1,654 words --for I counted them.
That would be nearly a column of one of our dailies.
A single issue of the bulkiest daily newspaper in the
world--the London TIMES--often contains 100,000 words
of reading-matter. Considering that the DAILY ANZEIGER
issues the usual twenty-six numbers per month, the reading
matter in a single number of the London TIMES would keep it
in "copy" two months and a half.

The ANZEIGER is an eight-page paper; its page is one
inch wider and one inch longer than a foolscap page;
that is to say, the dimensions of its page are somewhere
between those of a schoolboy's slate and a lady's
pocket handkerchief.  One-fourth of the first page is
taken up with the heading of the journal; this gives it
a rather top-heavy appearance; the rest of the first page
is reading-matter; all of the second page is reading-matter;
the other six pages are devoted to advertisements.

The reading-matter is compressed into two hundred
and five small-pica lines, and is lighted up with eight
pica headlines.  The bill of fare is as follows: First,
under a pica headline, to enforce attention and respect,
is a four-line sermon urging mankind to remember that,
although they are pilgrims here below, they are yet heirs
of heaven; and that "When they depart from earth they soar
to heaven." Perhaps a four-line sermon in a Saturday paper
is the sufficient German equivalent of the eight or ten
columns of sermons which the New-Yorkers get in their
Monday morning papers.  The latest news (two days old)
follows the four-line sermon, under the pica headline
"Telegrams"--these are "telegraphed" with a pair of
scissors out of the AUGSBURGER ZEITUNG of the day before.
These telegrams consist of fourteen and two-thirds lines
from Berlin, fifteen lines from Vienna, and two and five-eights
lines from Calcutta.  Thirty-three small-pica lines news
in a daily journal in a King's Capital of one hundred and
seventy thousand inhabitants is surely not an overdose.
Next we have the pica heading, "News of the Day,"
under which the following facts are set forth: Prince
Leopold is going on a visit to Vienna, six lines;
Prince Arnulph is coming back from Russia, two lines;
the Landtag will meet at ten o'clock in the morning and
consider an election law, three lines and one word over;
a city government item, five and one-half lines;
prices of tickets to the proposed grand Charity Ball,
twenty-three lines--for this one item occupies almost
one-fourth of the entire first page; there is to be
a wonderful Wagner concert in Frankfurt-on-the-Main,
with an orchestra of one hundred and eight instruments,
seven and one-half lines.  That concludes the first page.
Eighty-five lines, altogether, on that page,
including three headlines.  About fifty of those lines,
as one perceives, deal with local matters; so the reporters
are not overworked.

Exactly one-half of the second page is occupied with
an opera criticism, fifty-three lines (three of them
being headlines), and "Death Notices," ten lines.

The other half of the second page is made up of two
paragraphs under the head of "Miscellaneous News."
One of these paragraphs tells about a quarrel between the Czar
of Russia and his eldest son, twenty-one and a half lines;
and the other tells about the atrocious destruction of a
peasant child by its parents, forty lines, or one-fifth
of the total of the reading-matter contained in the paper.

Consider what a fifth part of the reading-matter of an American
daily paper issued in a city of one hundred and seventy
thousand inhabitants amounts to! Think what a mass it is.
Would any one suppose I could so snugly tuck away such a
mass in a chapter of this book that it would be difficult
to find it again in the reader lost his place? Surely not.
I will translate that child-murder word for word,
to give the reader a realizing sense of what a fifth
part of the reading-matter of a Munich daily actually
is when it comes under measurement of the eye:

"From Oberkreuzberg, January 21st, the DONAU ZEITUNG
receives a long account of a crime, which we shortened
as follows: In Rametuach, a village near Eppenschlag,
lived a young married couple with two children, one of which,
a boy aged five, was born three years before the marriage.
For this reason, and also because a relative at Iggensbach
had bequeathed M400 ($100) to the boy, the heartless
father considered him in the way; so the unnatural
parents determined to sacrifice him in the cruelest
possible manner.  They proceeded to starve him slowly
to death, meantime frightfully maltreating him--as the
village people now make known, when it is too late.
The boy was shut in a hole, and when people passed
by he cried, and implored them to give him bread.
His long-continued tortures and deprivations destroyed
him at last, on the third of January.  The sudden (sic)
death of the child created suspicion, the more so as the
body was immediately clothed and laid upon the bier.
Therefore the coroner gave notice, and an inquest was held
on the 6th.  What a pitiful spectacle was disclosed then!
The body was a complete skeleton.  The stomach and intestines
were utterly empty; they contained nothing whatsoever.
The flesh on the corpse was not as thick as the back of
a knife, and incisions in it brought not one drop of blood.
There was not a piece of sound skin the size of a dollar
on the whole body; wounds, scars, bruises, discolored
extravasated blood, everywhere--even on the soles of
the feet there were wounds.  The cruel parents asserted
that the boy had been so bad that they had been obliged
to use severe punishments, and that he finally fell over
a bench and broke his neck.  However, they were arrested
two weeks after the inquest and put in the prison at Deggendorf."

Yes, they were arrested "two weeks after the inquest."
What a home sound that has.  That kind of police briskness
rather more reminds me of my native land than German
journalism does.

I think a German daily journal doesn't do any good to
speak of, but at the same time it doesn't do any harm.
That is a very large merit, and should not be lightly
weighted nor lightly thought of.

The German humorous papers are beautifully printed upon
fine paper, and the illustrations are finely drawn,
finely engraved, and are not vapidly funny, but deliciously so.
So also, generally speaking, are the two or three terse
sentences which accompany the pictures.  I remember one
of these pictures: A most dilapidated tramp is ruefully
contemplating some coins which lie in his open palm.
He says: "Well, begging is getting played out.  Only about
five marks ($1.25) for the whole day; many an official
makes more!" And I call to mind a picture of a commercial
traveler who is about to unroll his samples:

MERCHANT (pettishly).--NO, don't. I don't want to buy anything!

DRUMMER.--If you please, I was only going to show you--

MERCHANT.--But I don't wish to see them!

DRUMMER (after a pause, pleadingly).--But do you you mind
letting ME look at them! I haven't seen them for three weeks!


End of the Project Gutenberg Etext of Twain's A Tramp Abroad






THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER

by Mark Twain




Hugh Latimer, Bishop of Worcester, to Lord Cromwell, on the birth
of the Prince of Wales (afterward Edward VI.).

From the National Manuscripts preserved by the British Government.

Ryght honorable, Salutem in Christo Jesu, and Syr here ys no lesse
joynge and rejossynge in thes partees for the byrth of our prynce,
hoom we hungurde for so longe, then ther was (I trow), inter
vicinos att the byrth of S. J. Baptyste, as thys berer, Master
Erance, can telle you.  Gode gyffe us alle grace, to yelde dew
thankes to our Lorde Gode, Gode of Inglonde, for verely He hathe
shoyd Hym selff Gode of Inglonde, or rather an Inglyssh Gode, yf
we consydyr and pondyr welle alle Hys procedynges with us from
tyme to tyme.  He hath over cumme alle our yllnesse with Hys
excedynge goodnesse, so that we are now moor then compellyd to
serve Hym, seke Hys glory, promott Hys wurde, yf the Devylle of
alle Devylles be natt in us.  We have now the stooppe of vayne
trustes ande the stey of vayne expectations; lett us alle pray for
hys preservatione.  Ande I for my partt wylle wyssh that hys Grace
allways have, and evyn now from the begynynge, Governares,
Instructores and offyceres of ryght jugmente, ne optimum ingenium
non optima educatione deprevetur.

Butt whatt a grett fowlle am I!  So, whatt devotione shoyth many
tymys butt lytelle dyscretione!  Ande thus the Gode of Inglonde be
ever with you in alle your procedynges.

The 19 of October.

Youres, H. L. B. of Wurcestere, now att Hartlebury.

Yf you wolde excytt thys berere to be moore hartye ayen the abuse
of ymagry or mor forwarde to promotte the veryte, ytt myght doo
goode.  Natt that ytt came of me, butt of your selffe, etc.

(Addressed)
To the Ryght Honorable Loorde P. Sealle hys synguler gode Lorde.



To those good-mannered and agreeable children
Susie and Clara Clemens
this book is affectionately inscribed by their father.



I will set down a tale as it was told to me by one who had it of
his father, which latter had it of HIS father, this last having in
like manner had it of HIS father--and so on, back and still back,
three hundred years and more, the fathers transmitting it to the
sons and so preserving it.  It may be history, it may be only a
legend, a tradition.  It may have happened, it may not have
happened:  but it COULD have happened.  It may be that the wise
and the learned believed it in the old days; it may be that only
the unlearned and the simple loved it and credited it.


Contents.

I.      The birth of the Prince and the Pauper.
II.     Tom's early life.
III.    Tom's meeting with the Prince.
IV.     The Prince's troubles begin.
V.      Tom as a patrician.
VI.     Tom receives instructions.
VII.    Tom's first royal dinner.
VIII.   The question of the Seal.
IX.     The river pageant.
X.      The Prince in the toils.
XI.     At Guildhall.
XII.    The Prince and his deliverer.
XIII.   The disappearance of the Prince.
XIV.    'Le Roi est mort--vive le Roi.'
XV.     Tom as King.
XVI.    The state dinner.
XVII.   Foo-foo the First.
XVIII.  The Prince with the tramps.
XIX.    The Prince with the peasants.
XX.     The Prince and the hermit.
XXI.    Hendon to the rescue.
XXII.   A victim of treachery.
XXIII.  The Prince a prisoner.
XXIV.   The escape.
XXV.    Hendon Hall.
XXVI.   Disowned.
XXVII.  In prison.
XXVIII. The sacrifice.
XXIX.   To London.
XXX.    Tom's progress.
XXXI.   The Recognition procession.
XXXII.  Coronation Day.
XXXIII. Edward as King.
Conclusion. Justice and Retribution.
Notes.



     'The quality of mercy . . . is twice bless'd;
      It blesseth him that gives, and him that takes;
      'Tis mightiest in the mightiest:  it becomes
      The thron-ed monarch better than his crown'.
                                   Merchant of Venice.



Chapter I. The birth of the Prince and the Pauper.

In the ancient city of London, on a certain autumn day in the
second quarter of the sixteenth century, a boy was born to a poor
family of the name of Canty, who did not want him.  On the same
day another English child was born to a rich family of the name of
Tudor, who did want him.  All England wanted him too.  England had
so longed for him, and hoped for him, and prayed God for him,
that, now that he was really come, the people went nearly mad for
joy.  Mere acquaintances hugged and kissed each other and cried.
Everybody took a holiday, and high and low, rich and poor, feasted
and danced and sang, and got very mellow; and they kept this up
for days and nights together.  By day, London was a sight to see,
with gay banners waving from every balcony and housetop, and
splendid pageants marching along.  By night, it was again a sight
to see, with its great bonfires at every corner, and its troops of
revellers making merry around them.  There was no talk in all
England but of the new baby, Edward Tudor, Prince of Wales, who
lay lapped in silks and satins, unconscious of all this fuss, and
not knowing that great lords and ladies were tending him and
watching over him--and not caring, either.  But there was no talk
about the other baby, Tom Canty, lapped in his poor rags, except
among the family of paupers whom he had just come to trouble with
his presence.



Chapter II. Tom's early life.

Let us skip a number of years.

London was fifteen hundred years old, and was a great town--for
that day.  It had a hundred thousand inhabitants--some think
double as many.  The streets were very narrow, and crooked, and
dirty, especially in the part where Tom Canty lived, which was not
far from London Bridge.  The houses were of wood, with the second
story projecting over the first, and the third sticking its elbows
out beyond the second.  The higher the houses grew, the broader
they grew.  They were skeletons of strong criss-cross beams, with
solid material between, coated with plaster.  The beams were
painted red or blue or black, according to the owner's taste, and
this gave the houses a very picturesque look.  The windows were
small, glazed with little diamond-shaped panes, and they opened
outward, on hinges, like doors.

The house which Tom's father lived in was up a foul little pocket
called Offal Court, out of Pudding Lane.  It was small, decayed,
and rickety, but it was packed full of wretchedly poor families.
Canty's tribe occupied a room on the third floor.  The mother and
father had a sort of bedstead in the corner; but Tom, his
grandmother, and his two sisters, Bet and Nan, were not
restricted--they had all the floor to themselves, and might sleep
where they chose.  There were the remains of a blanket or two, and
some bundles of ancient and dirty straw, but these could not
rightly be called beds, for they were not organised; they were
kicked into a general pile, mornings, and selections made from the
mass at night, for service.

Bet and Nan were fifteen years old--twins.  They were good-hearted
girls, unclean, clothed in rags, and profoundly ignorant.  Their
mother was like them.  But the father and the grandmother were a
couple of fiends.  They got drunk whenever they could; then they
fought each other or anybody else who came in the way; they cursed
and swore always, drunk or sober; John Canty was a thief, and his
mother a beggar.  They made beggars of the children, but failed to
make thieves of them.  Among, but not of, the dreadful rabble that
inhabited the house, was a good old priest whom the King had
turned out of house and home with a pension of a few farthings,
and he used to get the children aside and teach them right ways
secretly.  Father Andrew also taught Tom a little Latin, and how
to read and write; and would have done the same with the girls,
but they were afraid of the jeers of their friends, who could not
have endured such a queer accomplishment in them.

All Offal Court was just such another hive as Canty's house.
Drunkenness, riot and brawling were the order, there, every night
and nearly all night long.  Broken heads were as common as hunger
in that place.  Yet little Tom was not unhappy.  He had a hard
time of it, but did not know it.  It was the sort of time that all
the Offal Court boys had, therefore he supposed it was the correct
and comfortable thing.  When he came home empty-handed at night,
he knew his father would curse him and thrash him first, and that
when he was done the awful grandmother would do it all over again
and improve on it; and that away in the night his starving mother
would slip to him stealthily with any miserable scrap or crust she
had been able to save for him by going hungry herself,
notwithstanding she was often caught in that sort of treason and
soundly beaten for it by her husband.

No, Tom's life went along well enough, especially in summer.  He
only begged just enough to save himself, for the laws against
mendicancy were stringent, and the penalties heavy; so he put in a
good deal of his time listening to good Father Andrew's charming
old tales and legends about giants and fairies, dwarfs and genii,
and enchanted castles, and gorgeous kings and princes.  His head
grew to be full of these wonderful things, and many a night as he
lay in the dark on his scant and offensive straw, tired, hungry,
and smarting from a thrashing, he unleashed his imagination and
soon forgot his aches and pains in delicious picturings to himself
of the charmed life of a petted prince in a regal palace.  One
desire came in time to haunt him day and night:  it was to see a
real prince, with his own eyes.  He spoke of it once to some of
his Offal Court comrades; but they jeered him and scoffed him so
unmercifully that he was glad to keep his dream to himself after
that.

He often read the priest's old books and got him to explain and
enlarge upon them.  His dreamings and readings worked certain
changes in him, by-and-by.  His dream-people were so fine that he
grew to lament his shabby clothing and his dirt, and to wish to be
clean and better clad.  He went on playing in the mud just the
same, and enjoying it, too; but, instead of splashing around in
the Thames solely for the fun of it, he began to find an added
value in it because of the washings and cleansings it afforded.

Tom could always find something going on around the Maypole in
Cheapside, and at the fairs; and now and then he and the rest of
London had a chance to see a military parade when some famous
unfortunate was carried prisoner to the Tower, by land or boat.
One summer's day he saw poor Anne Askew and three men burned at
the stake in Smithfield, and heard an ex-Bishop preach a sermon to
them which did not interest him.  Yes, Tom's life was varied and
pleasant enough, on the whole.

By-and-by Tom's reading and dreaming about princely life wrought
such a strong effect upon him that he began to ACT the prince,
unconsciously.  His speech and manners became curiously
ceremonious and courtly, to the vast admiration and amusement of
his intimates.  But Tom's influence among these young people began
to grow now, day by day; and in time he came to be looked up to,
by them, with a sort of wondering awe, as a superior being.  He
seemed to know so much! and he could do and say such marvellous
things! and withal, he was so deep and wise!  Tom's remarks, and
Tom's performances, were reported by the boys to their elders; and
these, also, presently began to discuss Tom Canty, and to regard
him as a most gifted and extraordinary creature.  Full-grown
people brought their perplexities to Tom for solution, and were
often astonished at the wit and wisdom of his decisions.  In fact
he was become a hero to all who knew him except his own family--
these, only, saw nothing in him.

Privately, after a while, Tom organised a royal court!  He was the
prince; his special comrades were guards, chamberlains, equerries,
lords and ladies in waiting, and the royal family.  Daily the mock
prince was received with elaborate ceremonials borrowed by Tom
from his romantic readings; daily the great affairs of the mimic
kingdom were discussed in the royal council, and daily his mimic
highness issued decrees to his imaginary armies, navies, and
viceroyalties.

After which, he would go forth in his rags and beg a few
farthings, eat his poor crust, take his customary cuffs and abuse,
and then stretch himself upon his handful of foul straw, and
resume his empty grandeurs in his dreams.

And still his desire to look just once upon a real prince, in the
flesh, grew upon him, day by day, and week by week, until at last
it absorbed all other desires, and became the one passion of his
life.

One January day, on his usual begging tour, he tramped
despondently up and down the region round about Mincing Lane and
Little East Cheap, hour after hour, bare-footed and cold, looking
in at cook-shop windows and longing for the dreadful pork-pies and
other deadly inventions displayed there--for to him these were
dainties fit for the angels; that is, judging by the smell, they
were--for it had never been his good luck to own and eat one.
There was a cold drizzle of rain; the atmosphere was murky; it was
a melancholy day.  At night Tom reached home so wet and tired and
hungry that it was not possible for his father and grandmother to
observe his forlorn condition and not be moved--after their
fashion; wherefore they gave him a brisk cuffing at once and sent
him to bed.  For a long time his pain and hunger, and the swearing
and fighting going on in the building, kept him awake; but at last
his thoughts drifted away to far, romantic lands, and he fell
asleep in the company of jewelled and gilded princelings who live
in vast palaces, and had servants salaaming before them or flying
to execute their orders.  And then, as usual, he dreamed that HE
was a princeling himself.

All night long the glories of his royal estate shone upon him; he
moved among great lords and ladies, in a blaze of light, breathing
perfumes, drinking in delicious music, and answering the reverent
obeisances of the glittering throng as it parted to make way for
him, with here a smile, and there a nod of his princely head.

And when he awoke in the morning and looked upon the wretchedness
about him, his dream had had its usual effect--it had intensified
the sordidness of his surroundings a thousandfold.  Then came
bitterness, and heart-break, and tears.



Chapter III. Tom's meeting with the Prince.

Tom got up hungry, and sauntered hungry away, but with his
thoughts busy with the shadowy splendours of his night's dreams.
He wandered here and there in the city, hardly noticing where he
was going, or what was happening around him.  People jostled him,
and some gave him rough speech; but it was all lost on the musing
boy.  By-and-by he found himself at Temple Bar, the farthest from
home he had ever travelled in that direction.  He stopped and
considered a moment, then fell into his imaginings again, and
passed on outside the walls of London.  The Strand had ceased to
be a country-road then, and regarded itself as a street, but by a
strained construction; for, though there was a tolerably compact
row of houses on one side of it, there were only some scattered
great buildings on the other, these being palaces of rich nobles,
with ample and beautiful grounds stretching to the river--grounds
that are now closely packed with grim acres of brick and stone.

Tom discovered Charing Village presently, and rested himself at
the beautiful cross built there by a bereaved king of earlier
days; then idled down a quiet, lovely road, past the great
cardinal's stately palace, toward a far more mighty and majestic
palace beyond--Westminster.  Tom stared in glad wonder at the vast
pile of masonry, the wide-spreading wings, the frowning bastions
and turrets, the huge stone gateway, with its gilded bars and its
magnificent array of colossal granite lions, and other the signs
and symbols of English royalty.  Was the desire of his soul to be
satisfied at last?  Here, indeed, was a king's palace.  Might he
not hope to see a prince now--a prince of flesh and blood, if
Heaven were willing?

At each side of the gilded gate stood a living statue--that is to
say, an erect and stately and motionless man-at-arms, clad from
head to heel in shining steel armour.  At a respectful distance
were many country folk, and people from the city, waiting for any
chance glimpse of royalty that might offer.  Splendid carriages,
with splendid people in them and splendid servants outside, were
arriving and departing by several other noble gateways that
pierced the royal enclosure.

Poor little Tom, in his rags, approached, and was moving slowly
and timidly past the sentinels, with a beating heart and a rising
hope, when all at once he caught sight through the golden bars of
a spectacle that almost made him shout for joy.  Within was a
comely boy, tanned and brown with sturdy outdoor sports and
exercises, whose clothing was all of lovely silks and satins,
shining with jewels; at his hip a little jewelled sword and
dagger; dainty buskins on his feet, with red heels; and on his
head a jaunty crimson cap, with drooping plumes fastened with a
great sparkling gem.  Several gorgeous gentlemen stood near--his
servants, without a doubt.  Oh! he was a prince--a prince, a
living prince, a real prince--without the shadow of a question;
and the prayer of the pauper-boy's heart was answered at last.

Tom's breath came quick and short with excitement, and his eyes
grew big with wonder and delight.  Everything gave way in his mind
instantly to one desire:  that was to get close to the prince, and
have a good, devouring look at him.  Before he knew what he was
about, he had his face against the gate-bars.  The next instant
one of the soldiers snatched him rudely away, and sent him
spinning among the gaping crowd of country gawks and London
idlers.  The soldier said,--

"Mind thy manners, thou young beggar!"

The crowd jeered and laughed; but the young prince sprang to the
gate with his face flushed, and his eyes flashing with
indignation, and cried out,--

"How dar'st thou use a poor lad like that?  How dar'st thou use
the King my father's meanest subject so?  Open the gates, and let
him in!"

You should have seen that fickle crowd snatch off their hats then.
You should have heard them cheer, and shout, "Long live the Prince
of Wales!"

The soldiers presented arms with their halberds, opened the gates,
and presented again as the little Prince of Poverty passed in, in
his fluttering rags, to join hands with the Prince of Limitless
Plenty.

Edward Tudor said--

"Thou lookest tired and hungry:  thou'st been treated ill.  Come
with me."

Half a dozen attendants sprang forward to--I don't know what;
interfere, no doubt.  But they were waved aside with a right royal
gesture, and they stopped stock still where they were, like so
many statues.  Edward took Tom to a rich apartment in the palace,
which he called his cabinet.  By his command a repast was brought
such as Tom had never encountered before except in books.  The
prince, with princely delicacy and breeding, sent away the
servants, so that his humble guest might not be embarrassed by
their critical presence; then he sat near by, and asked questions
while Tom ate.

"What is thy name, lad?"

"Tom Canty, an' it please thee, sir."

"'Tis an odd one.  Where dost live?"

"In the city, please thee, sir.  Offal Court, out of Pudding
Lane."

"Offal Court!  Truly 'tis another odd one.  Hast parents?"

"Parents have I, sir, and a grand-dam likewise that is but
indifferently precious to me, God forgive me if it be offence to
say it--also twin sisters, Nan and Bet."

"Then is thy grand-dam not over kind to thee, I take it?"

"Neither to any other is she, so please your worship.  She hath a
wicked heart, and worketh evil all her days."

"Doth she mistreat thee?"

"There be times that she stayeth her hand, being asleep or
overcome with drink; but when she hath her judgment clear again,
she maketh it up to me with goodly beatings."

A fierce look came into the little prince's eyes, and he cried
out--

"What!  Beatings?"

"Oh, indeed, yes, please you, sir."

"BEATINGS!--and thou so frail and little.  Hark ye:  before the
night come, she shall hie her to the Tower.  The King my father"--

"In sooth, you forget, sir, her low degree.  The Tower is for the
great alone."

"True, indeed.  I had not thought of that.  I will consider of her
punishment.  Is thy father kind to thee?"

"Not more than Gammer Canty, sir."

"Fathers be alike, mayhap.  Mine hath not a doll's temper.  He
smiteth with a heavy hand, yet spareth me:  he spareth me not
always with his tongue, though, sooth to say.  How doth thy mother
use thee?"

"She is good, sir, and giveth me neither sorrow nor pain of any
sort.  And Nan and Bet are like to her in this."

"How old be these?"

"Fifteen, an' it please you, sir."

"The Lady Elizabeth, my sister, is fourteen, and the Lady Jane
Grey, my cousin, is of mine own age, and comely and gracious
withal; but my sister the Lady Mary, with her gloomy mien and--
Look you:  do thy sisters forbid their servants to smile, lest the
sin destroy their souls?"

"They?  Oh, dost think, sir, that THEY have servants?"

The little prince contemplated the little pauper gravely a moment,
then said--

"And prithee, why not?  Who helpeth them undress at night?  Who
attireth them when they rise?"

"None, sir.  Would'st have them take off their garment, and sleep
without--like the beasts?"

"Their garment!  Have they but one?"

"Ah, good your worship, what would they do with more?  Truly they
have not two bodies each."

"It is a quaint and marvellous thought!  Thy pardon, I had not
meant to laugh.  But thy good Nan and thy Bet shall have raiment
and lackeys enow, and that soon, too:  my cofferer shall look to
it.  No, thank me not; 'tis nothing.  Thou speakest well; thou
hast an easy grace in it.  Art learned?"

"I know not if I am or not, sir.  The good priest that is called
Father Andrew taught me, of his kindness, from his books."

"Know'st thou the Latin?"

"But scantly, sir, I doubt."

"Learn it, lad:  'tis hard only at first.  The Greek is harder;
but neither these nor any tongues else, I think, are hard to the
Lady Elizabeth and my cousin.  Thou should'st hear those damsels
at it!  But tell me of thy Offal Court.  Hast thou a pleasant life
there?"

"In truth, yes, so please you, sir, save when one is hungry.
There be Punch-and-Judy shows, and monkeys--oh such antic
creatures! and so bravely dressed!--and there be plays wherein
they that play do shout and fight till all are slain, and 'tis so
fine to see, and costeth but a farthing--albeit 'tis main hard to
get the farthing, please your worship."

"Tell me more."

"We lads of Offal Court do strive against each other with the
cudgel, like to the fashion of the 'prentices, sometimes."

The prince's eyes flashed.  Said he--

"Marry, that would not I mislike.  Tell me more."

"We strive in races, sir, to see who of us shall be fleetest."

"That would I like also.  Speak on."

"In summer, sir, we wade and swim in the canals and in the river,
and each doth duck his neighbour, and splatter him with water, and
dive and shout and tumble and--"

"'Twould be worth my father's kingdom but to enjoy it once!
Prithee go on."

"We dance and sing about the Maypole in Cheapside; we play in the
sand, each covering his neighbour up; and times we make mud
pastry--oh the lovely mud, it hath not its like for delightfulness
in all the world!--we do fairly wallow in the mud, sir, saving
your worship's presence."

"Oh, prithee, say no more, 'tis glorious!  If that I could but
clothe me in raiment like to thine, and strip my feet, and revel
in the mud once, just once, with none to rebuke me or forbid,
meseemeth I could forego the crown!"

"And if that I could clothe me once, sweet sir, as thou art clad--
just once--"

"Oho, would'st like it?  Then so shall it be.  Doff thy rags, and
don these splendours, lad!  It is a brief happiness, but will be
not less keen for that.  We will have it while we may, and change
again before any come to molest."

A few minutes later the little Prince of Wales was garlanded with
Tom's fluttering odds and ends, and the little Prince of Pauperdom
was tricked out in the gaudy plumage of royalty.  The two went and
stood side by side before a great mirror, and lo, a miracle:
there did not seem to have been any change made!  They stared at
each other, then at the glass, then at each other again.  At last
the puzzled princeling said--

"What dost thou make of this?"

"Ah, good your worship, require me not to answer.  It is not meet
that one of my degree should utter the thing."

"Then will _I_ utter it.  Thou hast the same hair, the same eyes,
the same voice and manner, the same form and stature, the same
face and countenance that I bear.  Fared we forth naked, there is
none could say which was you, and which the Prince of Wales.  And,
now that I am clothed as thou wert clothed, it seemeth I should be
able the more nearly to feel as thou didst when the brute soldier-
-Hark ye, is not this a bruise upon your hand?"

"Yes; but it is a slight thing, and your worship knoweth that the
poor man-at-arms--"

"Peace!  It was a shameful thing and a cruel!" cried the little
prince, stamping his bare foot.  "If the King--Stir not a step
till I come again!  It is a command!"

In a moment he had snatched up and put away an article of national
importance that lay upon a table, and was out at the door and
flying through the palace grounds in his bannered rags, with a hot
face and glowing eyes.  As soon as he reached the great gate, he
seized the bars, and tried to shake them, shouting--

"Open!  Unbar the gates!"

The soldier that had maltreated Tom obeyed promptly; and as the
prince burst through the portal, half-smothered with royal wrath,
the soldier fetched him a sounding box on the ear that sent him
whirling to the roadway, and said--

"Take that, thou beggar's spawn, for what thou got'st me from his
Highness!"

The crowd roared with laughter.  The prince picked himself out of
the mud, and made fiercely at the sentry, shouting--

"I am the Prince of Wales, my person is sacred; and thou shalt
hang for laying thy hand upon me!"

The soldier brought his halberd to a present-arms and said
mockingly--

"I salute your gracious Highness."  Then angrily--  "Be off, thou
crazy rubbish!"

Here the jeering crowd closed round the poor little prince, and
hustled him far down the road, hooting him, and shouting--

"Way for his Royal Highness!  Way for the Prince of Wales!"



Chapter IV. The Prince's troubles begin.

After hours of persistent pursuit and persecution, the little
prince was at last deserted by the rabble and left to himself.  As
long as he had been able to rage against the mob, and threaten it
royally, and royally utter commands that were good stuff to laugh
at, he was very entertaining; but when weariness finally forced
him to be silent, he was no longer of use to his tormentors, and
they sought amusement elsewhere.  He looked about him, now, but
could not recognise the locality.  He was within the city of
London--that was all he knew.  He moved on, aimlessly, and in a
little while the houses thinned, and the passers-by were
infrequent.  He bathed his bleeding feet in the brook which flowed
then where Farringdon Street now is; rested a few moments, then
passed on, and presently came upon a great space with only a few
scattered houses in it, and a prodigious church.  He recognised
this church.  Scaffoldings were about, everywhere, and swarms of
workmen; for it was undergoing elaborate repairs.  The prince took
heart at once--he felt that his troubles were at an end, now.  He
said to himself, "It is the ancient Grey Friars' Church, which the
king my father hath taken from the monks and given for a home for
ever for poor and forsaken children, and new-named it Christ's
Church.  Right gladly will they serve the son of him who hath done
so generously by them--and the more that that son is himself as
poor and as forlorn as any that be sheltered here this day, or
ever shall be."

He was soon in the midst of a crowd of boys who were running,
jumping, playing at ball and leap-frog, and otherwise disporting
themselves, and right noisily, too.  They were all dressed alike,
and in the fashion which in that day prevailed among serving-men
and 'prentices{1}--that is to say, each had on the crown of his
head a flat black cap about the size of a saucer, which was not
useful as a covering, it being of such scanty dimensions, neither
was it ornamental; from beneath it the hair fell, unparted, to the
middle of the forehead, and was cropped straight around; a
clerical band at the neck; a blue gown that fitted closely and
hung as low as the knees or lower; full sleeves; a broad red belt;
bright yellow stockings, gartered above the knees; low shoes with
large metal buckles.  It was a sufficiently ugly costume.

The boys stopped their play and flocked about the prince, who said
with native dignity--

"Good lads, say to your master that Edward Prince of Wales
desireth speech with him."

A great shout went up at this, and one rude fellow said--

"Marry, art thou his grace's messenger, beggar?"

The prince's face flushed with anger, and his ready hand flew to
his hip, but there was nothing there.  There was a storm of
laughter, and one boy said--

"Didst mark that?  He fancied he had a sword--belike he is the
prince himself."

This sally brought more laughter.  Poor Edward drew himself up
proudly and said--

"I am the prince; and it ill beseemeth you that feed upon the king
my father's bounty to use me so."

This was vastly enjoyed, as the laughter testified.  The youth who
had first spoken, shouted to his comrades--

"Ho, swine, slaves, pensioners of his grace's princely father,
where be your manners?  Down on your marrow bones, all of ye, and
do reverence to his kingly port and royal rags!"

With boisterous mirth they dropped upon their knees in a body and
did mock homage to their prey.  The prince spurned the nearest boy
with his foot, and said fiercely--

"Take thou that, till the morrow come and I build thee a gibbet!"

Ah, but this was not a joke--this was going beyond fun.  The
laughter ceased on the instant, and fury took its place.  A dozen
shouted--

"Hale him forth!  To the horse-pond, to the horse-pond!  Where be
the dogs?  Ho, there, Lion! ho, Fangs!"

Then followed such a thing as England had never seen before--the
sacred person of the heir to the throne rudely buffeted by
plebeian hands, and set upon and torn by dogs.

As night drew to a close that day, the prince found himself far
down in the close-built portion of the city.  His body was
bruised, his hands were bleeding, and his rags were all besmirched
with mud.  He wandered on and on, and grew more and more
bewildered, and so tired and faint he could hardly drag one foot
after the other.  He had ceased to ask questions of anyone, since
they brought him only insult instead of information.  He kept
muttering to himself, "Offal Court--that is the name; if I can but
find it before my strength is wholly spent and I drop, then am I
saved--for his people will take me to the palace and prove that I
am none of theirs, but the true prince, and I shall have mine own
again."  And now and then his mind reverted to his treatment by
those rude Christ's Hospital boys, and he said, "When I am king,
they shall not have bread and shelter only, but also teachings out
of books; for a full belly is little worth where the mind is
starved, and the heart.  I will keep this diligently in my
remembrance, that this day's lesson be not lost upon me, and my
people suffer thereby; for learning softeneth the heart and
breedeth gentleness and charity. {1}

The lights began to twinkle, it came on to rain, the wind rose,
and a raw and gusty night set in.  The houseless prince, the
homeless heir to the throne of England, still moved on, drifting
deeper into the maze of squalid alleys where the swarming hives of
poverty and misery were massed together.

Suddenly a great drunken ruffian collared him and said--

"Out to this time of night again, and hast not brought a farthing
home, I warrant me!  If it be so, an' I do not break all the bones
in thy lean body, then am I not John Canty, but some other."

The prince twisted himself loose, unconsciously brushed his
profaned shoulder, and eagerly said--

"Oh, art HIS father, truly?  Sweet heaven grant it be so--then
wilt thou fetch him away and restore me!"

"HIS father?  I know not what thou mean'st; I but know I am THY
father, as thou shalt soon have cause to--"

"Oh, jest not, palter not, delay not!--I am worn, I am wounded, I
can bear no more.  Take me to the king my father, and he will make
thee rich beyond thy wildest dreams.  Believe me, man, believe
me!--I speak no lie, but only the truth!--put forth thy hand and
save me!  I am indeed the Prince of Wales!"

The man stared down, stupefied, upon the lad, then shook his head
and muttered--

"Gone stark mad as any Tom o' Bedlam!"--then collared him once
more, and said with a coarse laugh and an oath, "But mad or no
mad, I and thy Gammer Canty will soon find where the soft places
in thy bones lie, or I'm no true man!"

With this he dragged the frantic and struggling prince away, and
disappeared up a front court followed by a delighted and noisy
swarm of human vermin.



Chapter V. Tom as a patrician.

Tom Canty, left alone in the prince's cabinet, made good use of
his opportunity.  He turned himself this way and that before the
great mirror, admiring his finery; then walked away, imitating the
prince's high-bred carriage, and still observing results in the
glass.  Next he drew the beautiful sword, and bowed, kissing the
blade, and laying it across his breast, as he had seen a noble
knight do, by way of salute to the lieutenant of the Tower, five
or six weeks before, when delivering the great lords of Norfolk
and Surrey into his hands for captivity.  Tom played with the
jewelled dagger that hung upon his thigh; he examined the costly
and exquisite ornaments of the room; he tried each of the
sumptuous chairs, and thought how proud he would be if the Offal
Court herd could only peep in and see him in his grandeur.  He
wondered if they would believe the marvellous tale he should tell
when he got home, or if they would shake their heads, and say his
overtaxed imagination had at last upset his reason.

At the end of half an hour it suddenly occurred to him that the
prince was gone a long time; then right away he began to feel
lonely; very soon he fell to listening and longing, and ceased to
toy with the pretty things about him; he grew uneasy, then
restless, then distressed.  Suppose some one should come, and
catch him in the prince's clothes, and the prince not there to
explain.  Might they not hang him at once, and inquire into his
case afterward?  He had heard that the great were prompt about
small matters.  His fear rose higher and higher; and trembling he
softly opened the door to the antechamber, resolved to fly and
seek the prince, and, through him, protection and release.  Six
gorgeous gentlemen-servants and two young pages of high degree,
clothed like butterflies, sprang to their feet and bowed low
before him.  He stepped quickly back and shut the door.  He said--

"Oh, they mock at me!  They will go and tell.  Oh! why came I here
to cast away my life?"

He walked up and down the floor, filled with nameless fears,
listening, starting at every trifling sound.  Presently the door
swung open, and a silken page said--

"The Lady Jane Grey."

The door closed and a sweet young girl, richly clad, bounded
toward him.  But she stopped suddenly, and said in a distressed
voice--

"Oh, what aileth thee, my lord?"

Tom's breath was nearly failing him; but he made shift to stammer
out--

"Ah, be merciful, thou!  In sooth I am no lord, but only poor Tom
Canty of Offal Court in the city.  Prithee let me see the prince,
and he will of his grace restore to me my rags, and let me hence
unhurt.  Oh, be thou merciful, and save me!"

By this time the boy was on his knees, and supplicating with his
eyes and uplifted hands as well as with his tongue.  The young
girl seemed horror-stricken.  She cried out--

"O my lord, on thy knees?--and to ME!"

Then she fled away in fright; and Tom, smitten with despair, sank
down, murmuring--

"There is no help, there is no hope.  Now will they come and take
me."

Whilst he lay there benumbed with terror, dreadful tidings were
speeding through the palace.  The whisper--for it was whispered
always--flew from menial to menial, from lord to lady, down all
the long corridors, from story to story, from saloon to saloon,
"The prince hath gone mad, the prince hath gone mad!"  Soon every
saloon, every marble hall, had its groups of glittering lords and
ladies, and other groups of dazzling lesser folk, talking
earnestly together in whispers, and every face had in it dismay.
Presently a splendid official came marching by these groups,
making solemn proclamation--

                    "IN THE NAME OF THE KING!

Let none list to this false and foolish matter, upon pain of
death, nor discuss the same, nor carry it abroad.  In the name of
the King!"

The whisperings ceased as suddenly as if the whisperers had been
stricken dumb.

Soon there was a general buzz along the corridors, of "The prince!
See, the prince comes!"

Poor Tom came slowly walking past the low-bowing groups, trying to
bow in return, and meekly gazing upon his strange surroundings
with bewildered and pathetic eyes.  Great nobles walked upon each
side of him, making him lean upon them, and so steady his steps.
Behind him followed the court-physicians and some servants.

Presently Tom found himself in a noble apartment of the palace and
heard the door close behind him.  Around him stood those who had
come with him.  Before him, at a little distance, reclined a very
large and very fat man, with a wide, pulpy face, and a stern
expression.  His large head was very grey; and his whiskers, which
he wore only around his face, like a frame, were grey also.  His
clothing was of rich stuff, but old, and slightly frayed in
places.  One of his swollen legs had a pillow under it, and was
wrapped in bandages.  There was silence now; and there was no head
there but was bent in reverence, except this man's.  This stern-
countenanced invalid was the dread Henry VIII.  He said--and his
face grew gentle as he began to speak--

"How now, my lord Edward, my prince?  Hast been minded to cozen
me, the good King thy father, who loveth thee, and kindly useth
thee, with a sorry jest?"

Poor Tom was listening, as well as his dazed faculties would let
him, to the beginning of this speech; but when the words 'me, the
good King' fell upon his ear, his face blanched, and he dropped as
instantly upon his knees as if a shot had brought him there.
Lifting up his hands, he exclaimed--

"Thou the KING?  Then am I undone indeed!"

This speech seemed to stun the King.  His eyes wandered from face
to face aimlessly, then rested, bewildered, upon the boy before
him.  Then he said in a tone of deep disappointment--

"Alack, I had believed the rumour disproportioned to the truth;
but I fear me 'tis not so."  He breathed a heavy sigh, and said in
a gentle voice, "Come to thy father, child:  thou art not well."

Tom was assisted to his feet, and approached the Majesty of
England, humble and trembling.  The King took the frightened face
between his hands, and gazed earnestly and lovingly into it
awhile, as if seeking some grateful sign of returning reason
there, then pressed the curly head against his breast, and patted
it tenderly.  Presently he said--

"Dost not know thy father, child?  Break not mine old heart; say
thou know'st me.  Thou DOST know me, dost thou not?"

"Yea:  thou art my dread lord the King, whom God preserve!"

"True, true--that is well--be comforted, tremble not so; there is
none here would hurt thee; there is none here but loves thee.
Thou art better now; thy ill dream passeth--is't not so?  Thou
wilt not miscall thyself again, as they say thou didst a little
while agone?"

"I pray thee of thy grace believe me, I did but speak the truth,
most dread lord; for I am the meanest among thy subjects, being a
pauper born, and 'tis by a sore mischance and accident I am here,
albeit I was therein nothing blameful.  I am but young to die, and
thou canst save me with one little word.  Oh speak it, sir!"

"Die?  Talk not so, sweet prince--peace, peace, to thy troubled
heart--thou shalt not die!"

Tom dropped upon his knees with a glad cry--

"God requite thy mercy, O my King, and save thee long to bless thy
land!"  Then springing up, he turned a joyful face toward the two
lords in waiting, and exclaimed, "Thou heard'st it!  I am not to
die:  the King hath said it!"  There was no movement, save that
all bowed with grave respect; but no one spoke.  He hesitated, a
little confused, then turned timidly toward the King, saying, "I
may go now?"

"Go?  Surely, if thou desirest.  But why not tarry yet a little?
Whither would'st go?"

Tom dropped his eyes, and answered humbly--

"Peradventure I mistook; but I did think me free, and so was I
moved to seek again the kennel where I was born and bred to
misery, yet which harboureth my mother and my sisters, and so is
home to me; whereas these pomps and splendours whereunto I am not
used--oh, please you, sir, to let me go!"

The King was silent and thoughtful a while, and his face betrayed
a growing distress and uneasiness.  Presently he said, with
something of hope in his voice--

"Perchance he is but mad upon this one strain, and hath his wits
unmarred as toucheth other matter.  God send it may be so!  We
will make trial."

Then he asked Tom a question in Latin, and Tom answered him lamely
in the same tongue.  The lords and doctors manifested their
gratification also.  The King said--

"'Twas not according to his schooling and ability, but showeth
that his mind is but diseased, not stricken fatally.  How say you,
sir?"

The physician addressed bowed low, and replied--

"It jumpeth with my own conviction, sire, that thou hast divined
aright."

The King looked pleased with this encouragement, coming as it did
from so excellent authority, and continued with good heart--

"Now mark ye all:  we will try him further."

He put a question to Tom in French.  Tom stood silent a moment,
embarrassed by having so many eyes centred upon him, then said
diffidently--

"I have no knowledge of this tongue, so please your majesty."

The King fell back upon his couch.  The attendants flew to his
assistance; but he put them aside, and said--

"Trouble me not--it is nothing but a scurvy faintness.  Raise me!
There, 'tis sufficient.  Come hither, child; there, rest thy poor
troubled head upon thy father's heart, and be at peace.  Thou'lt
soon be well:  'tis but a passing fantasy.  Fear thou not; thou'lt
soon be well."  Then he turned toward the company:  his gentle
manner changed, and baleful lightnings began to play from his
eyes.  He said--

"List ye all!  This my son is mad; but it is not permanent.  Over-
study hath done this, and somewhat too much of confinement.  Away
with his books and teachers! see ye to it.  Pleasure him with
sports, beguile him in wholesome ways, so that his health come
again."  He raised himself higher still, and went on with energy,
"He is mad; but he is my son, and England's heir; and, mad or
sane, still shall he reign!  And hear ye further, and proclaim it:
whoso speaketh of this his distemper worketh against the peace and
order of these realms, and shall to the gallows! . . . Give me to
drink--I burn:  this sorrow sappeth my strength. . . . There, take
away the cup. . . . Support me.  There, that is well.  Mad, is he?
Were he a thousand times mad, yet is he Prince of Wales, and I the
King will confirm it.  This very morrow shall he be installed in
his princely dignity in due and ancient form.  Take instant order
for it, my lord Hertford."

One of the nobles knelt at the royal couch, and said--

"The King's majesty knoweth that the Hereditary Great Marshal of
England lieth attainted in the Tower.  It were not meet that one
attainted--"

"Peace!  Insult not mine ears with his hated name.  Is this man to
live for ever?  Am I to be baulked of my will?  Is the prince to
tarry uninstalled, because, forsooth, the realm lacketh an Earl
Marshal free of treasonable taint to invest him with his honours?
No, by the splendour of God!  Warn my Parliament to bring me
Norfolk's doom before the sun rise again, else shall they answer
for it grievously!" {1}

Lord Hertford said--

"The King's will is law;" and, rising, returned to his former
place.

Gradually the wrath faded out of the old King's face, and he said-
-

"Kiss me, my prince.  There . . . what fearest thou?  Am I not thy
loving father?"

"Thou art good to me that am unworthy, O mighty and gracious lord:
that in truth I know.  But--but--it grieveth me to think of him
that is to die, and--"

"Ah, 'tis like thee, 'tis like thee!  I know thy heart is still
the same, even though thy mind hath suffered hurt, for thou wert
ever of a gentle spirit.  But this duke standeth between thee and
thine honours:  I will have another in his stead that shall bring
no taint to his great office.  Comfort thee, my prince:  trouble
not thy poor head with this matter."

"But is it not I that speed him hence, my liege?  How long might
he not live, but for me?"

"Take no thought of him, my prince:  he is not worthy.  Kiss me
once again, and go to thy trifles and amusements; for my malady
distresseth me.  I am aweary, and would rest.  Go with thine uncle
Hertford and thy people, and come again when my body is
refreshed."

Tom, heavy-hearted, was conducted from the presence, for this last
sentence was a death-blow to the hope he had cherished that now he
would be set free.  Once more he heard the buzz of low voices
exclaiming, "The prince, the prince comes!"

His spirits sank lower and lower as he moved between the
glittering files of bowing courtiers; for he recognised that he
was indeed a captive now, and might remain for ever shut up in
this gilded cage, a forlorn and friendless prince, except God in
his mercy take pity on him and set him free.

And, turn where he would, he seemed to see floating in the air the
severed head and the remembered face of the great Duke of Norfolk,
the eyes fixed on him reproachfully.

His old dreams had been so pleasant; but this reality was so
dreary!



Chapter VI. Tom receives instructions.

Tom was conducted to the principal apartment of a noble suite, and
made to sit down--a thing which he was loth to do, since there
were elderly men and men of high degree about him.  He begged them
to be seated also, but they only bowed their thanks or murmured
them, and remained standing.  He would have insisted, but his
'uncle' the Earl of Hertford whispered in his ear--

"Prithee, insist not, my lord; it is not meet that they sit in thy
presence."

The Lord St. John was announced, and after making obeisance to
Tom, he said--

"I come upon the King's errand, concerning a matter which
requireth privacy.  Will it please your royal highness to dismiss
all that attend you here, save my lord the Earl of Hertford?"

Observing that Tom did not seem to know how to proceed, Hertford
whispered him to make a sign with his hand, and not trouble
himself to speak unless he chose.  When the waiting gentlemen had
retired, Lord St. John said--

"His majesty commandeth, that for due and weighty reasons of
state, the prince's grace shall hide his infirmity in all ways
that be within his power, till it be passed and he be as he was
before.  To wit, that he shall deny to none that he is the true
prince, and heir to England's greatness; that he shall uphold his
princely dignity, and shall receive, without word or sign of
protest, that reverence and observance which unto it do appertain
of right and ancient usage; that he shall cease to speak to any of
that lowly birth and life his malady hath conjured out of the
unwholesome imaginings of o'er-wrought fancy; that he shall strive
with diligence to bring unto his memory again those faces which he
was wont to know--and where he faileth he shall hold his peace,
neither betraying by semblance of surprise or other sign that he
hath forgot; that upon occasions of state, whensoever any matter
shall perplex him as to the thing he should do or the utterance he
should make, he shall show nought of unrest to the curious that
look on, but take advice in that matter of the Lord Hertford, or
my humble self, which are commanded of the King to be upon this
service and close at call, till this commandment be dissolved.
Thus saith the King's majesty, who sendeth greeting to your royal
highness, and prayeth that God will of His mercy quickly heal you
and have you now and ever in His holy keeping."

The Lord St. John made reverence and stood aside.  Tom replied
resignedly--

"The King hath said it.  None may palter with the King's command,
or fit it to his ease, where it doth chafe, with deft evasions.
The King shall be obeyed."

Lord Hertford said--

"Touching the King's majesty's ordainment concerning books and
such like serious matters, it may peradventure please your
highness to ease your time with lightsome entertainment, lest you
go wearied to the banquet and suffer harm thereby."

Tom's face showed inquiring surprise; and a blush followed when he
saw Lord St. John's eyes bent sorrowfully upon him.  His lordship
said--

"Thy memory still wrongeth thee, and thou hast shown surprise--but
suffer it not to trouble thee, for 'tis a matter that will not
bide, but depart with thy mending malady.  My Lord of Hertford
speaketh of the city's banquet which the King's majesty did
promise, some two months flown, your highness should attend.  Thou
recallest it now?"

"It grieves me to confess it had indeed escaped me," said Tom, in
a hesitating voice; and blushed again.

At this moment the Lady Elizabeth and the Lady Jane Grey were
announced.  The two lords exchanged significant glances, and
Hertford stepped quickly toward the door.  As the young girls
passed him, he said in a low voice--

"I pray ye, ladies, seem not to observe his humours, nor show
surprise when his memory doth lapse--it will grieve you to note
how it doth stick at every trifle."

Meantime Lord St. John was saying in Tom's ear--

"Please you, sir, keep diligently in mind his majesty's desire.
Remember all thou canst--SEEM to remember all else.  Let them not
perceive that thou art much changed from thy wont, for thou
knowest how tenderly thy old play-fellows bear thee in their
hearts and how 'twould grieve them.  Art willing, sir, that I
remain?--and thine uncle?"

Tom signified assent with a gesture and a murmured word, for he
was already learning, and in his simple heart was resolved to
acquit himself as best he might, according to the King's command.

In spite of every precaution, the conversation among the young
people became a little embarrassing at times.  More than once, in
truth, Tom was near to breaking down and confessing himself
unequal to his tremendous part; but the tact of the Princess
Elizabeth saved him, or a word from one or the other of the
vigilant lords, thrown in apparently by chance, had the same happy
effect.  Once the little Lady Jane turned to Tom and dismayed him
with this question,--

"Hast paid thy duty to the Queen's majesty to-day, my lord?"

Tom hesitated, looked distressed, and was about to stammer out
something at hazard, when Lord St. John took the word and answered
for him with the easy grace of a courtier accustomed to encounter
delicate difficulties and to be ready for them--

"He hath indeed, madam, and she did greatly hearten him, as
touching his majesty's condition; is it not so, your highness?"

Tom mumbled something that stood for assent, but felt that he was
getting upon dangerous ground.  Somewhat later it was mentioned
that Tom was to study no more at present, whereupon her little
ladyship exclaimed--

"'Tis a pity, 'tis a pity!  Thou wert proceeding bravely.  But
bide thy time in patience:  it will not be for long.  Thou'lt yet
be graced with learning like thy father, and make thy tongue
master of as many languages as his, good my prince."

"My father!" cried Tom, off his guard for the moment.  "I trow he
cannot speak his own so that any but the swine that kennel in the
styes may tell his meaning; and as for learning of any sort
soever--"

He looked up and encountered a solemn warning in my Lord St.
John's eyes.

He stopped, blushed, then continued low and sadly: "Ah, my malady
persecuteth me again, and my mind wandereth.  I meant the King's
grace no irreverence."

"We know it, sir," said the Princess Elizabeth, taking her
'brother's' hand between her two palms, respectfully but
caressingly; "trouble not thyself as to that.  The fault is none
of thine, but thy distemper's."

"Thou'rt a gentle comforter, sweet lady," said Tom, gratefully,
"and my heart moveth me to thank thee for't, an' I may be so
bold."

Once the giddy little Lady Jane fired a simple Greek phrase at
Tom.  The Princess Elizabeth's quick eye saw by the serene
blankness of the target's front that the shaft was overshot; so
she tranquilly delivered a return volley of sounding Greek on
Tom's behalf, and then straightway changed the talk to other
matters.

Time wore on pleasantly, and likewise smoothly, on the whole.
Snags and sandbars grew less and less frequent, and Tom grew more
and more at his ease, seeing that all were so lovingly bent upon
helping him and overlooking his mistakes.  When it came out that
the little ladies were to accompany him to the Lord Mayor's
banquet in the evening, his heart gave a bound of relief and
delight, for he felt that he should not be friendless, now, among
that multitude of strangers; whereas, an hour earlier, the idea of
their going with him would have been an insupportable terror to
him.

Tom's guardian angels, the two lords, had had less comfort in the
interview than the other parties to it.  They felt much as if they
were piloting a great ship through a dangerous channel; they were
on the alert constantly, and found their office no child's play.
Wherefore, at last, when the ladies' visit was drawing to a close
and the Lord Guilford Dudley was announced, they not only felt
that their charge had been sufficiently taxed for the present, but
also that they themselves were not in the best condition to take
their ship back and make their anxious voyage all over again.  So
they respectfully advised Tom to excuse himself, which he was very
glad to do, although a slight shade of disappointment might have
been observed upon my Lady Jane's face when she heard the splendid
stripling denied admittance.

There was a pause now, a sort of waiting silence which Tom could
not understand.  He glanced at Lord Hertford, who gave him a sign-
-but he failed to understand that also.  The ready Elizabeth came
to the rescue with her usual easy grace.  She made reverence and
said--

"Have we leave of the prince's grace my brother to go?"

Tom said--

"Indeed your ladyships can have whatsoever of me they will, for
the asking; yet would I rather give them any other thing that in
my poor power lieth, than leave to take the light and blessing of
their presence hence.  Give ye good den, and God be with ye!"
Then he smiled inwardly at the thought, "'Tis not for nought I
have dwelt but among princes in my reading, and taught my tongue
some slight trick of their broidered and gracious speech withal!"

When the illustrious maidens were gone, Tom turned wearily to his
keepers and said--

"May it please your lordships to grant me leave to go into some
corner and rest me?"

Lord Hertford said--

"So please your highness, it is for you to command, it is for us
to obey.  That thou should'st rest is indeed a needful thing,
since thou must journey to the city presently."

He touched a bell, and a page appeared, who was ordered to desire
the presence of Sir William Herbert.  This gentleman came
straightway, and conducted Tom to an inner apartment.  Tom's first
movement there was to reach for a cup of water; but a silk-and-
velvet servitor seized it, dropped upon one knee, and offered it
to him on a golden salver.

Next the tired captive sat down and was going to take off his
buskins, timidly asking leave with his eye, but another silk-and-
velvet discomforter went down upon his knees and took the office
from him.  He made two or three further efforts to help himself,
but being promptly forestalled each time, he finally gave up, with
a sigh of resignation and a murmured "Beshrew me, but I marvel
they do not require to breathe for me also!"  Slippered, and
wrapped in a sumptuous robe, he laid himself down at last to rest,
but not to sleep, for his head was too full of thoughts and the
room too full of people.  He could not dismiss the former, so they
stayed; he did not know enough to dismiss the latter, so they
stayed also, to his vast regret--and theirs.


Tom's departure had left his two noble guardians alone.  They
mused a while, with much head-shaking and walking the floor, then
Lord St. John said--

"Plainly, what dost thou think?"

"Plainly, then, this.  The King is near his end; my nephew is mad-
-mad will mount the throne, and mad remain.  God protect England,
since she will need it!"

"Verily it promiseth so, indeed.  But . . . have you no misgivings
as to . . . as to . . ."

The speaker hesitated, and finally stopped.  He evidently felt
that he was upon delicate ground.  Lord Hertford stopped before
him, looked into his face with a clear, frank eye, and said--

"Speak on--there is none to hear but me.  Misgivings as to what?"

"I am full loth to word the thing that is in my mind, and thou so
near to him in blood, my lord.  But craving pardon if I do offend,
seemeth it not strange that madness could so change his port and
manner?--not but that his port and speech are princely still, but
that they DIFFER, in one unweighty trifle or another, from what
his custom was aforetime.  Seemeth it not strange that madness
should filch from his memory his father's very lineaments; the
customs and observances that are his due from such as be about
him; and, leaving him his Latin, strip him of his Greek and
French?  My lord, be not offended, but ease my mind of its
disquiet and receive my grateful thanks.  It haunteth me, his
saying he was not the prince, and so--"

"Peace, my lord, thou utterest treason!  Hast forgot the King's
command?  Remember I am party to thy crime if I but listen."

St. John paled, and hastened to say--

"I was in fault, I do confess it.  Betray me not, grant me this
grace out of thy courtesy, and I will neither think nor speak of
this thing more.  Deal not hardly with me, sir, else am I ruined."

"I am content, my lord.  So thou offend not again, here or in the
ears of others, it shall be as though thou hadst not spoken.  But
thou need'st not have misgivings.  He is my sister's son; are not
his voice, his face, his form, familiar to me from his cradle?
Madness can do all the odd conflicting things thou seest in him,
and more.  Dost not recall how that the old Baron Marley, being
mad, forgot the favour of his own countenance that he had known
for sixty years, and held it was another's; nay, even claimed he
was the son of Mary Magdalene, and that his head was made of
Spanish glass; and, sooth to say, he suffered none to touch it,
lest by mischance some heedless hand might shiver it?  Give thy
misgivings easement, good my lord.  This is the very prince--I
know him well--and soon will be thy king; it may advantage thee to
bear this in mind, and more dwell upon it than the other."

After some further talk, in which the Lord St. John covered up his
mistake as well as he could by repeated protests that his faith
was thoroughly grounded now, and could not be assailed by doubts
again, the Lord Hertford relieved his fellow-keeper, and sat down
to keep watch and ward alone.  He was soon deep in meditation, and
evidently the longer he thought, the more he was bothered.  By-
and-by he began to pace the floor and mutter.

"Tush, he MUST be the prince!  Will any he in all the land
maintain there can be two, not of one blood and birth, so
marvellously twinned?  And even were it so, 'twere yet a stranger
miracle that chance should cast the one into the other's place.
Nay, 'tis folly, folly, folly!"

Presently he said--

"Now were he impostor and called himself prince, look you THAT
would be natural; that would be reasonable.  But lived ever an
impostor yet, who, being called prince by the king, prince by the
court, prince by all, DENIED his dignity and pleaded against his
exaltation?  NO!  By the soul of St. Swithin, no!  This is the
true prince, gone mad!"



Chapter VII. Tom's first royal dinner.

Somewhat after one in the afternoon, Tom resignedly underwent the
ordeal of being dressed for dinner.  He found himself as finely
clothed as before, but everything different, everything changed,
from his ruff to his stockings.  He was presently conducted with
much state to a spacious and ornate apartment, where a table was
already set for one.  Its furniture was all of massy gold, and
beautified with designs which well-nigh made it priceless, since
they were the work of Benvenuto.  The room was half-filled with
noble servitors.  A chaplain said grace, and Tom was about to fall
to, for hunger had long been constitutional with him, but was
interrupted by my lord the Earl of Berkeley, w