ho fastened a napkin
about his neck; for the great post of Diaperers to the Prince of
Wales was hereditary in this nobleman's family.  Tom's cupbearer
was present, and forestalled all his attempts to help himself to
wine.  The Taster to his highness the Prince of Wales was there
also, prepared to taste any suspicious dish upon requirement, and
run the risk of being poisoned.  He was only an ornamental
appendage at this time, and was seldom called upon to exercise his
function; but there had been times, not many generations past,
when the office of taster had its perils, and was not a grandeur
to be desired.  Why they did not use a dog or a plumber seems
strange; but all the ways of royalty are strange.  My Lord d'Arcy,
First Groom of the Chamber, was there, to do goodness knows what;
but there he was--let that suffice.  The Lord Chief Butler was
there, and stood behind Tom's chair, overseeing the solemnities,
under command of the Lord Great Steward and the Lord Head Cook,
who stood near.  Tom had three hundred and eighty-four servants
beside these; but they were not all in that room, of course, nor
the quarter of them; neither was Tom aware yet that they existed.

All those that were present had been well drilled within the hour
to remember that the prince was temporarily out of his head, and
to be careful to show no surprise at his vagaries.  These
'vagaries' were soon on exhibition before them; but they only
moved their compassion and their sorrow, not their mirth.  It was
a heavy affliction to them to see the beloved prince so stricken.

Poor Tom ate with his fingers mainly; but no one smiled at it, or
even seemed to observe it.  He inspected his napkin curiously, and
with deep interest, for it was of a very dainty and beautiful
fabric, then said with simplicity--

"Prithee, take it away, lest in mine unheedfulness it be soiled."

The Hereditary Diaperer took it away with reverent manner, and
without word or protest of any sort.

Tom examined the turnips and the lettuce with interest, and asked
what they were, and if they were to be eaten; for it was only
recently that men had begun to raise these things in England in
place of importing them as luxuries from Holland. {1}  His
question was answered with grave respect, and no surprise
manifested.  When he had finished his dessert, he filled his
pockets with nuts; but nobody appeared to be aware of it, or
disturbed by it.  But the next moment he was himself disturbed by
it, and showed discomposure; for this was the only service he had
been permitted to do with his own hands during the meal, and he
did not doubt that he had done a most improper and unprincely
thing.  At that moment the muscles of his nose began to twitch,
and the end of that organ to lift and wrinkle.  This continued,
and Tom began to evince a growing distress.  He looked
appealingly, first at one and then another of the lords about him,
and tears came into his eyes.  They sprang forward with dismay in
their faces, and begged to know his trouble.  Tom said with
genuine anguish--

"I crave your indulgence:  my nose itcheth cruelly.  What is the
custom and usage in this emergence?  Prithee, speed, for 'tis but
a little time that I can bear it."

None smiled; but all were sore perplexed, and looked one to the
other in deep tribulation for counsel.  But behold, here was a
dead wall, and nothing in English history to tell how to get over
it.  The Master of Ceremonies was not present:  there was no one
who felt safe to venture upon this uncharted sea, or risk the
attempt to solve this solemn problem.  Alas! there was no
Hereditary Scratcher.  Meantime the tears had overflowed their
banks, and begun to trickle down Tom's cheeks.  His twitching nose
was pleading more urgently than ever for relief.  At last nature
broke down the barriers of etiquette:  Tom lifted up an inward
prayer for pardon if he was doing wrong, and brought relief to the
burdened hearts of his court by scratching his nose himself.

His meal being ended, a lord came and held before him a broad,
shallow, golden dish with fragrant rosewater in it, to cleanse his
mouth and fingers with; and my lord the Hereditary Diaperer stood
by with a napkin for his use.  Tom gazed at the dish a puzzled
moment or two, then raised it to his lips, and gravely took a
draught.  Then he returned it to the waiting lord, and said--

"Nay, it likes me not, my lord:  it hath a pretty flavour, but it
wanteth strength."

This new eccentricity of the prince's ruined mind made all the
hearts about him ache; but the sad sight moved none to merriment.

Tom's next unconscious blunder was to get up and leave the table
just when the chaplain had taken his stand behind his chair, and
with uplifted hands, and closed, uplifted eyes, was in the act of
beginning the blessing.  Still nobody seemed to perceive that the
prince had done a thing unusual.

By his own request our small friend was now conducted to his
private cabinet, and left there alone to his own devices.  Hanging
upon hooks in the oaken wainscoting were the several pieces of a
suit of shining steel armour, covered all over with beautiful
designs exquisitely inlaid in gold.  This martial panoply belonged
to the true prince--a recent present from Madam Parr the Queen.
Tom put on the greaves, the gauntlets, the plumed helmet, and such
other pieces as he could don without assistance, and for a while
was minded to call for help and complete the matter, but bethought
him of the nuts he had brought away from dinner, and the joy it
would be to eat them with no crowd to eye him, and no Grand
Hereditaries to pester him with undesired services; so he restored
the pretty things to their several places, and soon was cracking
nuts, and feeling almost naturally happy for the first time since
God for his sins had made him a prince.  When the nuts were all
gone, he stumbled upon some inviting books in a closet, among them
one about the etiquette of the English court.  This was a prize.
He lay down upon a sumptuous divan, and proceeded to instruct
himself with honest zeal.  Let us leave him there for the present.



Chapter VIII. The question of the Seal.

About five o'clock Henry VIII. awoke out of an unrefreshing nap,
and muttered to himself, "Troublous dreams, troublous dreams!
Mine end is now at hand:  so say these warnings, and my failing
pulses do confirm it."  Presently a wicked light flamed up in his
eye, and he muttered, "Yet will not I die till HE go before."

His attendants perceiving that he was awake, one of them asked his
pleasure concerning the Lord Chancellor, who was waiting without.

"Admit him, admit him!" exclaimed the King eagerly.

The Lord Chancellor entered, and knelt by the King's couch,
saying--

"I have given order, and, according to the King's command, the
peers of the realm, in their robes, do now stand at the bar of the
House, where, having confirmed the Duke of Norfolk's doom, they
humbly wait his majesty's further pleasure in the matter."

The King's face lit up with a fierce joy.  Said he--

"Lift me up!  In mine own person will I go before my Parliament,
and with mine own hand will I seal the warrant that rids me of--"

His voice failed; an ashen pallor swept the flush from his cheeks;
and the attendants eased him back upon his pillows, and hurriedly
assisted him with restoratives.  Presently he said sorrowfully--

"Alack, how have I longed for this sweet hour! and lo, too late it
cometh, and I am robbed of this so coveted chance.  But speed ye,
speed ye! let others do this happy office sith 'tis denied to me.
I put my Great Seal in commission:  choose thou the lords that
shall compose it, and get ye to your work.  Speed ye, man!  Before
the sun shall rise and set again, bring me his head that I may see
it."

"According to the King's command, so shall it be.  Will't please
your majesty to order that the Seal be now restored to me, so that
I may forth upon the business?"

"The Seal?  Who keepeth the Seal but thou?"

"Please your majesty, you did take it from me two days since,
saying it should no more do its office till your own royal hand
should use it upon the Duke of Norfolk's warrant."

"Why, so in sooth I did:  I do remember . . . What did I with it?
. . . I am very feeble . . . So oft these days doth my memory play
the traitor with me . . . 'Tis strange, strange--"

The King dropped into inarticulate mumblings, shaking his grey
head weakly from time to time, and gropingly trying to recollect
what he had done with the Seal.  At last my Lord Hertford ventured
to kneel and offer information--

"Sire, if that I may be so bold, here be several that do remember
with me how that you gave the Great Seal into the hands of his
highness the Prince of Wales to keep against the day that--"

"True, most true!" interrupted the King.  "Fetch it!  Go:  time
flieth!"

Lord Hertford flew to Tom, but returned to the King before very
long, troubled and empty-handed.  He delivered himself to this
effect--

"It grieveth me, my lord the King, to bear so heavy and unwelcome
tidings; but it is the will of God that the prince's affliction
abideth still, and he cannot recall to mind that he received the
Seal.  So came I quickly to report, thinking it were waste of
precious time, and little worth withal, that any should attempt to
search the long array of chambers and saloons that belong unto his
royal high--"

A groan from the King interrupted the lord at this point.  After a
little while his majesty said, with a deep sadness in his tone--

"Trouble him no more, poor child.  The hand of God lieth heavy
upon him, and my heart goeth out in loving compassion for him, and
sorrow that I may not bear his burden on mine old trouble-weighted
shoulders, and so bring him peace."

He closed his eyes, fell to mumbling, and presently was silent.
After a time he opened his eyes again, and gazed vacantly around
until his glance rested upon the kneeling Lord Chancellor.
Instantly his face flushed with wrath--

"What, thou here yet!  By the glory of God, an' thou gettest not
about that traitor's business, thy mitre shall have holiday the
morrow for lack of a head to grace withal!"

The trembling Chancellor answered--

"Good your Majesty, I cry you mercy!  I but waited for the Seal."

"Man, hast lost thy wits?  The small Seal which aforetime I was
wont to take with me abroad lieth in my treasury.  And, since the
Great Seal hath flown away, shall not it suffice?  Hast lost thy
wits?  Begone!  And hark ye--come no more till thou do bring his
head."

The poor Chancellor was not long in removing himself from this
dangerous vicinity; nor did the commission waste time in giving
the royal assent to the work of the slavish Parliament, and
appointing the morrow for the beheading of the premier peer of
England, the luckless Duke of Norfolk. {1}



Chapter IX. The river pageant.

At nine in the evening the whole vast river-front of the palace
was blazing with light.  The river itself, as far as the eye could
reach citywards, was so thickly covered with watermen's boats and
with pleasure-barges, all fringed with coloured lanterns, and
gently agitated by the waves, that it resembled a glowing and
limitless garden of flowers stirred to soft motion by summer
winds.  The grand terrace of stone steps leading down to the
water, spacious enough to mass the army of a German principality
upon, was a picture to see, with its ranks of royal halberdiers in
polished armour, and its troops of brilliantly costumed servitors
flitting up and down, and to and fro, in the hurry of preparation.

Presently a command was given, and immediately all living
creatures vanished from the steps.  Now the air was heavy with the
hush of suspense and expectancy.  As far as one's vision could
carry, he might see the myriads of people in the boats rise up,
and shade their eyes from the glare of lanterns and torches, and
gaze toward the palace.

A file of forty or fifty state barges drew up to the steps.  They
were richly gilt, and their lofty prows and sterns were
elaborately carved.  Some of them were decorated with banners and
streamers; some with cloth-of-gold and arras embroidered with
coats-of-arms; others with silken flags that had numberless little
silver bells fastened to them, which shook out tiny showers of
joyous music whenever the breezes fluttered them; others of yet
higher pretensions, since they belonged to nobles in the prince's
immediate service, had their sides picturesquely fenced with
shields gorgeously emblazoned with armorial bearings.  Each state
barge was towed by a tender.  Besides the rowers, these tenders
carried each a number of men-at-arms in glossy helmet and
breastplate, and a company of musicians.

The advance-guard of the expected procession now appeared in the
great gateway, a troop of halberdiers.  'They were dressed in
striped hose of black and tawny, velvet caps graced at the sides
with silver roses, and doublets of murrey and blue cloth,
embroidered on the front and back with the three feathers, the
prince's blazon, woven in gold.  Their halberd staves were covered
with crimson velvet, fastened with gilt nails, and ornamented with
gold tassels.  Filing off on the right and left, they formed two
long lines, extending from the gateway of the palace to the
water's edge.  A thick rayed cloth or carpet was then unfolded,
and laid down between them by attendants in the gold-and-crimson
liveries of the prince.  This done, a flourish of trumpets
resounded from within.  A lively prelude arose from the musicians
on the water; and two ushers with white wands marched with a slow
and stately pace from the portal.  They were followed by an
officer bearing the civic mace, after whom came another carrying
the city's sword; then several sergeants of the city guard, in
their full accoutrements, and with badges on their sleeves; then
the Garter King-at-arms, in his tabard; then several Knights of
the Bath, each with a white lace on his sleeve; then their
esquires; then the judges, in their robes of scarlet and coifs;
then the Lord High Chancellor of England, in a robe of scarlet,
open before, and purfled with minever; then a deputation of
aldermen, in their scarlet cloaks; and then the heads of the
different civic companies, in their robes of state.  Now came
twelve French gentlemen, in splendid habiliments, consisting of
pourpoints of white damask barred with gold, short mantles of
crimson velvet lined with violet taffeta, and carnation coloured
hauts-de-chausses, and took their way down the steps.  They were
of the suite of the French ambassador, and were followed by twelve
cavaliers of the suite of the Spanish ambassador, clothed in black
velvet, unrelieved by any ornament.  Following these came several
great English nobles with their attendants.'

There was a flourish of trumpets within; and the Prince's uncle,
the future great Duke of Somerset, emerged from the gateway,
arrayed in a 'doublet of black cloth-of-gold, and a cloak of
crimson satin flowered with gold, and ribanded with nets of
silver.'  He turned, doffed his plumed cap, bent his body in a low
reverence, and began to step backward, bowing at each step.  A
prolonged trumpet-blast followed, and a proclamation, "Way for the
high and mighty the Lord Edward, Prince of Wales!"  High aloft on
the palace walls a long line of red tongues of flame leapt forth
with a thunder-crash; the massed world on the river burst into a
mighty roar of welcome; and Tom Canty, the cause and hero of it
all, stepped into view and slightly bowed his princely head.

He was 'magnificently habited in a doublet of white satin, with a
front-piece of purple cloth-of-tissue, powdered with diamonds, and
edged with ermine.  Over this he wore a mantle of white cloth-of-
gold, pounced with the triple-feathered crest, lined with blue
satin, set with pearls and precious stones, and fastened with a
clasp of brilliants.  About his neck hung the order of the Garter,
and several princely foreign orders;' and wherever light fell upon
him jewels responded with a blinding flash.  O Tom Canty, born in
a hovel, bred in the gutters of London, familiar with rags and
dirt and misery, what a spectacle is this!



Chapter X. The Prince in the toils.

We left John Canty dragging the rightful prince into Offal Court,
with a noisy and delighted mob at his heels.  There was but one
person in it who offered a pleading word for the captive, and he
was not heeded; he was hardly even heard, so great was the
turmoil.  The Prince continued to struggle for freedom, and to
rage against the treatment he was suffering, until John Canty lost
what little patience was left in him, and raised his oaken cudgel
in a sudden fury over the Prince's head.  The single pleader for
the lad sprang to stop the man's arm, and the blow descended upon
his own wrist.  Canty roared out--

"Thou'lt meddle, wilt thou?  Then have thy reward."

His cudgel crashed down upon the meddler's head:  there was a
groan, a dim form sank to the ground among the feet of the crowd,
and the next moment it lay there in the dark alone.  The mob
pressed on, their enjoyment nothing disturbed by this episode.

Presently the Prince found himself in John Canty's abode, with the
door closed against the outsiders.  By the vague light of a tallow
candle which was thrust into a bottle, he made out the main
features of the loathsome den, and also the occupants of it.  Two
frowsy girls and a middle-aged woman cowered against the wall in
one corner, with the aspect of animals habituated to harsh usage,
and expecting and dreading it now.  From another corner stole a
withered hag with streaming grey hair and malignant eyes.  John
Canty said to this one--

"Tarry!  There's fine mummeries here.  Mar them not till thou'st
enjoyed them:  then let thy hand be heavy as thou wilt.  Stand
forth, lad.  Now say thy foolery again, an thou'st not forgot it.
Name thy name.  Who art thou?"

The insulted blood mounted to the little prince's cheek once more,
and he lifted a steady and indignant gaze to the man's face and
said--

"'Tis but ill-breeding in such as thou to command me to speak.  I
tell thee now, as I told thee before, I am Edward, Prince of
Wales, and none other."

The stunning surprise of this reply nailed the hag's feet to the
floor where she stood, and almost took her breath.  She stared at
the Prince in stupid amazement, which so amused her ruffianly son,
that he burst into a roar of laughter.  But the effect upon Tom
Canty's mother and sisters was different.  Their dread of bodily
injury gave way at once to distress of a different sort.  They ran
forward with woe and dismay in their faces, exclaiming--

"Oh, poor Tom, poor lad!"

The mother fell on her knees before the Prince, put her hands upon
his shoulders, and gazed yearningly into his face through her
rising tears.  Then she said--

"Oh, my poor boy!  Thy foolish reading hath wrought its woeful
work at last, and ta'en thy wit away.  Ah! why did'st thou cleave
to it when I so warned thee 'gainst it?  Thou'st broke thy
mother's heart."

The Prince looked into her face, and said gently--

"Thy son is well, and hath not lost his wits, good dame.  Comfort
thee:  let me to the palace where he is, and straightway will the
King my father restore him to thee."

"The King thy father!  Oh, my child! unsay these words that be
freighted with death for thee, and ruin for all that be near to
thee.  Shake of this gruesome dream.  Call back thy poor wandering
memory.  Look upon me.  Am not I thy mother that bore thee, and
loveth thee?"

The Prince shook his head and reluctantly said--

"God knoweth I am loth to grieve thy heart; but truly have I never
looked upon thy face before."

The woman sank back to a sitting posture on the floor, and,
covering her eyes with her hands, gave way to heart-broken sobs
and wailings.

"Let the show go on!" shouted Canty.  "What, Nan!--what, Bet!
mannerless wenches! will ye stand in the Prince's presence?  Upon
your knees, ye pauper scum, and do him reverence!"

He followed this with another horse-laugh.  The girls began to
plead timidly for their brother; and Nan said--

"An thou wilt but let him to bed, father, rest and sleep will heal
his madness:  prithee, do."

"Do, father," said Bet; "he is more worn than is his wont.  To-
morrow will he be himself again, and will beg with diligence, and
come not empty home again."

This remark sobered the father's joviality, and brought his mind
to business.  He turned angrily upon the Prince, and said--

"The morrow must we pay two pennies to him that owns this hole;
two pennies, mark ye--all this money for a half-year's rent, else
out of this we go.  Show what thou'st gathered with thy lazy
begging."

The Prince said--

"Offend me not with thy sordid matters.  I tell thee again I am
the King's son."

A sounding blow upon the Prince's shoulder from Canty's broad palm
sent him staggering into goodwife Canty's arms, who clasped him to
her breast, and sheltered him from a pelting rain of cuffs and
slaps by interposing her own person.  The frightened girls
retreated to their corner; but the grandmother stepped eagerly
forward to assist her son.  The Prince sprang away from Mrs.
Canty, exclaiming--

"Thou shalt not suffer for me, madam.  Let these swine do their
will upon me alone."

This speech infuriated the swine to such a degree that they set
about their work without waste of time.  Between them they
belaboured the boy right soundly, and then gave the girls and
their mother a beating for showing sympathy for the victim.

"Now," said Canty, "to bed, all of ye.  The entertainment has
tired me."

The light was put out, and the family retired.  As soon as the
snorings of the head of the house and his mother showed that they
were asleep, the young girls crept to where the Prince lay, and
covered him tenderly from the cold with straw and rags; and their
mother crept to him also, and stroked his hair, and cried over
him, whispering broken words of comfort and compassion in his ear
the while.  She had saved a morsel for him to eat, also; but the
boy's pains had swept away all appetite--at least for black and
tasteless crusts.  He was touched by her brave and costly defence
of him, and by her commiseration; and he thanked her in very noble
and princely words, and begged her to go to her sleep and try to
forget her sorrows.  And he added that the King his father would
not let her loyal kindness and devotion go unrewarded.  This
return to his 'madness' broke her heart anew, and she strained him
to her breast again and again, and then went back, drowned in
tears, to her bed.

As she lay thinking and mourning, the suggestion began to creep
into her mind that there was an undefinable something about this
boy that was lacking in Tom Canty, mad or sane.  She could not
describe it, she could not tell just what it was, and yet her
sharp mother-instinct seemed to detect it and perceive it.  What
if the boy were really not her son, after all?  Oh, absurd!  She
almost smiled at the idea, spite of her griefs and troubles.  No
matter, she found that it was an idea that would not 'down,' but
persisted in haunting her.  It pursued her, it harassed her, it
clung to her, and refused to be put away or ignored.  At last she
perceived that there was not going to be any peace for her until
she should devise a test that should prove, clearly and without
question, whether this lad was her son or not, and so banish these
wearing and worrying doubts.  Ah, yes, this was plainly the right
way out of the difficulty; therefore she set her wits to work at
once to contrive that test.  But it was an easier thing to propose
than to accomplish.  She turned over in her mind one promising
test after another, but was obliged to relinquish them all--none
of them were absolutely sure, absolutely perfect; and an imperfect
one could not satisfy her.  Evidently she was racking her head in
vain--it seemed manifest that she must give the matter up.  While
this depressing thought was passing through her mind, her ear
caught the regular breathing of the boy, and she knew he had
fallen asleep.  And while she listened, the measured breathing was
broken by a soft, startled cry, such as one utters in a troubled
dream.  This chance occurrence furnished her instantly with a plan
worth all her laboured tests combined.  She at once set herself
feverishly, but noiselessly, to work to relight her candle,
muttering to herself, "Had I but seen him THEN, I should have
known!  Since that day, when he was little, that the powder burst
in his face, he hath never been startled of a sudden out of his
dreams or out of his thinkings, but he hath cast his hand before
his eyes, even as he did that day; and not as others would do it,
with the palm inward, but always with the palm turned outward--I
have seen it a hundred times, and it hath never varied nor ever
failed.  Yes, I shall soon know, now!"

By this time she had crept to the slumbering boy's side, with the
candle, shaded, in her hand.  She bent heedfully and warily over
him, scarcely breathing in her suppressed excitement, and suddenly
flashed the light in his face and struck the floor by his ear with
her knuckles.  The sleeper's eyes sprang wide open, and he cast a
startled stare about him--but he made no special movement with his
hands.

The poor woman was smitten almost helpless with surprise and
grief; but she contrived to hide her emotions, and to soothe the
boy to sleep again; then she crept apart and communed miserably
with herself upon the disastrous result of her experiment.  She
tried to believe that her Tom's madness had banished this habitual
gesture of his; but she could not do it.  "No," she said, "his
HANDS are not mad; they could not unlearn so old a habit in so
brief a time.  Oh, this is a heavy day for me!"

Still, hope was as stubborn now as doubt had been before; she
could not bring herself to accept the verdict of the test; she
must try the thing again--the failure must have been only an
accident; so she startled the boy out of his sleep a second and a
third time, at intervals--with the same result which had marked
the first test; then she dragged herself to bed, and fell
sorrowfully asleep, saying, "But I cannot give him up--oh no, I
cannot, I cannot--he MUST be my boy!"

The poor mother's interruptions having ceased, and the Prince's
pains having gradually lost their power to disturb him, utter
weariness at last sealed his eyes in a profound and restful sleep.
Hour after hour slipped away, and still he slept like the dead.
Thus four or five hours passed.  Then his stupor began to lighten.
Presently, while half asleep and half awake, he murmured--

"Sir William!"

After a moment--

"Ho, Sir William Herbert!  Hie thee hither, and list to the
strangest dream that ever . . . Sir William! dost hear?  Man, I
did think me changed to a pauper, and . . . Ho there!  Guards!
Sir William!  What! is there no groom of the chamber in waiting?
Alack! it shall go hard with--"

"What aileth thee?" asked a whisper near him.  "Who art thou
calling?"

"Sir William Herbert.  Who art thou?"

"I?  Who should I be, but thy sister Nan?  Oh, Tom, I had forgot!
Thou'rt mad yet--poor lad, thou'rt mad yet:  would I had never
woke to know it again!  But prithee master thy tongue, lest we be
all beaten till we die!"

The startled Prince sprang partly up, but a sharp reminder from
his stiffened bruises brought him to himself, and he sank back
among his foul straw with a moan and the ejaculation--

"Alas! it was no dream, then!"

In a moment all the heavy sorrow and misery which sleep had
banished were upon him again, and he realised that he was no
longer a petted prince in a palace, with the adoring eyes of a
nation upon him, but a pauper, an outcast, clothed in rags,
prisoner in a den fit only for beasts, and consorting with beggars
and thieves.

In the midst of his grief he began to be conscious of hilarious
noises and shoutings, apparently but a block or two away.  The
next moment there were several sharp raps at the door; John Canty
ceased from snoring and said--

"Who knocketh?  What wilt thou?"

A voice answered--

"Know'st thou who it was thou laid thy cudgel on?"

"No.  Neither know I, nor care."

"Belike thou'lt change thy note eftsoons.  An thou would save thy
neck, nothing but flight may stead thee.  The man is this moment
delivering up the ghost.  'Tis the priest, Father Andrew!"

"God-a-mercy!" exclaimed Canty.  He roused his family, and
hoarsely commanded, "Up with ye all and fly--or bide where ye are
and perish!"

Scarcely five minutes later the Canty household were in the street
and flying for their lives.  John Canty held the Prince by the
wrist, and hurried him along the dark way, giving him this caution
in a low voice--

"Mind thy tongue, thou mad fool, and speak not our name.  I will
choose me a new name, speedily, to throw the law's dogs off the
scent.  Mind thy tongue, I tell thee!"

He growled these words to the rest of the family--

"If it so chance that we be separated, let each make for London
Bridge; whoso findeth himself as far as the last linen-draper's
shop on the bridge, let him tarry there till the others be come,
then will we flee into Southwark together."

At this moment the party burst suddenly out of darkness into
light; and not only into light, but into the midst of a multitude
of singing, dancing, and shouting people, massed together on the
river frontage.  There was a line of bonfires stretching as far as
one could see, up and down the Thames; London Bridge was
illuminated; Southwark Bridge likewise; the entire river was aglow
with the flash and sheen of coloured lights; and constant
explosions of fireworks filled the skies with an intricate
commingling of shooting splendours and a thick rain of dazzling
sparks that almost turned night into day; everywhere were crowds
of revellers; all London seemed to be at large.

John Canty delivered himself of a furious curse and commanded a
retreat; but it was too late.  He and his tribe were swallowed up
in that swarming hive of humanity, and hopelessly separated from
each other in an instant.  We are not considering that the Prince
was one of his tribe; Canty still kept his grip upon him.  The
Prince's heart was beating high with hopes of escape, now.  A
burly waterman, considerably exalted with liquor, found himself
rudely shoved by Canty in his efforts to plough through the crowd;
he laid his great hand on Canty's shoulder and said--

"Nay, whither so fast, friend?  Dost canker thy soul with sordid
business when all that be leal men and true make holiday?"

"Mine affairs are mine own, they concern thee not," answered
Canty, roughly; "take away thy hand and let me pass."

"Sith that is thy humour, thou'lt NOT pass, till thou'st drunk to
the Prince of Wales, I tell thee that," said the waterman, barring
the way resolutely.

"Give me the cup, then, and make speed, make speed!"

Other revellers were interested by this time.  They cried out--

"The loving-cup, the loving-cup! make the sour knave drink the
loving-cup, else will we feed him to the fishes."

So a huge loving-cup was brought; the waterman, grasping it by one
of its handles, and with the other hand bearing up the end of an
imaginary napkin, presented it in due and ancient form to Canty,
who had to grasp the opposite handle with one of his hands and
take off the lid with the other, according to ancient custom. {1}
This left the Prince hand-free for a second, of course.  He wasted
no time, but dived among the forest of legs about him and
disappeared.  In another moment he could not have been harder to
find, under that tossing sea of life, if its billows had been the
Atlantic's and he a lost sixpence.

He very soon realised this fact, and straightway busied himself
about his own affairs without further thought of John Canty.  He
quickly realised another thing, too.  To wit, that a spurious
Prince of Wales was being feasted by the city in his stead.  He
easily concluded that the pauper lad, Tom Canty, had deliberately
taken advantage of his stupendous opportunity and become a
usurper.

Therefore there was but one course to pursue--find his way to the
Guildhall, make himself known, and denounce the impostor.  He also
made up his mind that Tom should be allowed a reasonable time for
spiritual preparation, and then be hanged, drawn and quartered,
according to the law and usage of the day in cases of high
treason.



Chapter XI. At Guildhall.

The royal barge, attended by its gorgeous fleet, took its stately
way down the Thames through the wilderness of illuminated boats.
The air was laden with music; the river banks were beruffled with
joy-flames; the distant city lay in a soft luminous glow from its
countless invisible bonfires; above it rose many a slender spire
into the sky, incrusted with sparkling lights, wherefore in their
remoteness they seemed like jewelled lances thrust aloft; as the
fleet swept along, it was greeted from the banks with a continuous
hoarse roar of cheers and the ceaseless flash and boom of
artillery.

To Tom Canty, half buried in his silken cushions, these sounds and
this spectacle were a wonder unspeakably sublime and astonishing.
To his little friends at his side, the Princess Elizabeth and the
Lady Jane Grey, they were nothing.

Arrived at the Dowgate, the fleet was towed up the limpid Walbrook
(whose channel has now been for two centuries buried out of sight
under acres of buildings) to Bucklersbury, past houses and under
bridges populous with merry-makers and brilliantly lighted, and at
last came to a halt in a basin where now is Barge Yard, in the
centre of the ancient city of London.  Tom disembarked, and he and
his gallant procession crossed Cheapside and made a short march
through the Old Jewry and Basinghall Street to the Guildhall.

Tom and his little ladies were received with due ceremony by the
Lord Mayor and the Fathers of the City, in their gold chains and
scarlet robes of state, and conducted to a rich canopy of state at
the head of the great hall, preceded by heralds making
proclamation, and by the Mace and the City Sword.  The lords and
ladies who were to attend upon Tom and his two small friends took
their places behind their chairs.

At a lower table the Court grandees and other guests of noble
degree were seated, with the magnates of the city; the commoners
took places at a multitude of tables on the main floor of the
hall.  From their lofty vantage-ground the giants Gog and Magog,
the ancient guardians of the city, contemplated the spectacle
below them with eyes grown familiar to it in forgotten
generations.  There was a bugle-blast and a proclamation, and a
fat butler appeared in a high perch in the leftward wall, followed
by his servitors bearing with impressive solemnity a royal baron
of beef, smoking hot and ready for the knife.

After grace, Tom (being instructed) rose--and the whole house with
him--and drank from a portly golden loving-cup with the Princess
Elizabeth; from her it passed to the Lady Jane, and then traversed
the general assemblage.  So the banquet began.

By midnight the revelry was at its height.  Now came one of those
picturesque spectacles so admired in that old day.  A description
of it is still extant in the quaint wording of a chronicler who
witnessed it:

'Space being made, presently entered a baron and an earl appareled
after the Turkish fashion in long robes of bawdkin powdered with
gold; hats on their heads of crimson velvet, with great rolls of
gold, girded with two swords, called scimitars, hanging by great
bawdricks of gold.  Next came yet another baron and another earl,
in two long gowns of yellow satin, traversed with white satin, and
in every bend of white was a bend of crimson satin, after the
fashion of Russia, with furred hats of gray on their heads; either
of them having an hatchet in their hands, and boots with pykes'
(points a foot long), 'turned up.  And after them came a knight,
then the Lord High Admiral, and with him five nobles, in doublets
of crimson velvet, voyded low on the back and before to the
cannell-bone, laced on the breasts with chains of silver; and over
that, short cloaks of crimson satin, and on their heads hats after
the dancers' fashion, with pheasants' feathers in them.  These
were appareled after the fashion of Prussia.  The torchbearers,
which were about an hundred, were appareled in crimson satin and
green, like Moors, their faces black.  Next came in a mommarye.
Then the minstrels, which were disguised, danced; and the lords
and ladies did wildly dance also, that it was a pleasure to
behold.'

And while Tom, in his high seat, was gazing upon this 'wild'
dancing, lost in admiration of the dazzling commingling of
kaleidoscopic colours which the whirling turmoil of gaudy figures
below him presented, the ragged but real little Prince of Wales
was proclaiming his rights and his wrongs, denouncing the
impostor, and clamouring for admission at the gates of Guildhall!
The crowd enjoyed this episode prodigiously, and pressed forward
and craned their necks to see the small rioter.  Presently they
began to taunt him and mock at him, purposely to goad him into a
higher and still more entertaining fury.  Tears of mortification
sprang to his eyes, but he stood his ground and defied the mob
right royally.  Other taunts followed, added mockings stung him,
and he exclaimed--

"I tell ye again, you pack of unmannerly curs, I am the Prince of
Wales!  And all forlorn and friendless as I be, with none to give
me word of grace or help me in my need, yet will not I be driven
from my ground, but will maintain it!"

"Though thou be prince or no prince, 'tis all one, thou be'st a
gallant lad, and not friendless neither!  Here stand I by thy side
to prove it; and mind I tell thee thou might'st have a worser
friend than Miles Hendon and yet not tire thy legs with seeking.
Rest thy small jaw, my child; I talk the language of these base
kennel-rats like to a very native."

The speaker was a sort of Don Caesar de Bazan in dress, aspect,
and bearing.  He was tall, trim-built, muscular.  His doublet and
trunks were of rich material, but faded and threadbare, and their
gold-lace adornments were sadly tarnished; his ruff was rumpled
and damaged; the plume in his slouched hat was broken and had a
bedraggled and disreputable look; at his side he wore a long
rapier in a rusty iron sheath; his swaggering carriage marked him
at once as a ruffler of the camp.  The speech of this fantastic
figure was received with an explosion of jeers and laughter.  Some
cried, "'Tis another prince in disguise!"  "'Ware thy tongue,
friend:  belike he is dangerous!"  "Marry, he looketh it--mark his
eye!"  "Pluck the lad from him--to the horse-pond wi' the cub!"

Instantly a hand was laid upon the Prince, under the impulse of
this happy thought; as instantly the stranger's long sword was out
and the meddler went to the earth under a sounding thump with the
flat of it.  The next moment a score of voices shouted, "Kill the
dog!  Kill him!  Kill him!" and the mob closed in on the warrior,
who backed himself against a wall and began to lay about him with
his long weapon like a madman.  His victims sprawled this way and
that, but the mob-tide poured over their prostrate forms and
dashed itself against the champion with undiminished fury.  His
moments seemed numbered, his destruction certain, when suddenly a
trumpet-blast sounded, a voice shouted, "Way for the King's
messenger!" and a troop of horsemen came charging down upon the
mob, who fled out of harm's reach as fast as their legs could
carry them.  The bold stranger caught up the Prince in his arms,
and was soon far away from danger and the multitude.

Return we within the Guildhall.  Suddenly, high above the jubilant
roar and thunder of the revel, broke the clear peal of a bugle-
note.  There was instant silence--a deep hush; then a single voice
rose--that of the messenger from the palace--and began to pipe
forth a proclamation, the whole multitude standing listening.

The closing words, solemnly pronounced, were--

"The King is dead!"

The great assemblage bent their heads upon their breasts with one
accord; remained so, in profound silence, a few moments; then all
sank upon their knees in a body, stretched out their hands toward
Tom, and a mighty shout burst forth that seemed to shake the
building--

"Long live the King!"

Poor Tom's dazed eyes wandered abroad over this stupefying
spectacle, and finally rested dreamily upon the kneeling
princesses beside him, a moment, then upon the Earl of Hertford.
A sudden purpose dawned in his face.  He said, in a low tone, at
Lord Hertford's ear--

"Answer me truly, on thy faith and honour!  Uttered I here a
command, the which none but a king might hold privilege and
prerogative to utter, would such commandment be obeyed, and none
rise up to say me nay?"

"None, my liege, in all these realms.  In thy person bides the
majesty of England.  Thou art the king--thy word is law."

Tom responded, in a strong, earnest voice, and with great
animation--

"Then shall the king's law be law of mercy, from this day, and
never more be law of blood!  Up from thy knees and away!  To the
Tower, and say the King decrees the Duke of Norfolk shall not
die!" {1}

The words were caught up and carried eagerly from lip to lip far
and wide over the hall, and as Hertford hurried from the presence,
another prodigious shout burst forth--

"The reign of blood is ended!  Long live Edward, King of England!"



Chapter XII. The Prince and his deliverer.

As soon as Miles Hendon and the little prince were clear of the
mob, they struck down through back lanes and alleys toward the
river.  Their way was unobstructed until they approached London
Bridge; then they ploughed into the multitude again, Hendon
keeping a fast grip upon the Prince's--no, the King's--wrist.  The
tremendous news was already abroad, and the boy learned it from a
thousand voices at once--"The King is dead!"  The tidings struck a
chill to the heart of the poor little waif, and sent a shudder
through his frame.  He realised the greatness of his loss, and was
filled with a bitter grief; for the grim tyrant who had been such
a terror to others had always been gentle with him.  The tears
sprang to his eyes and blurred all objects.  For an instant he
felt himself the most forlorn, outcast, and forsaken of God's
creatures--then another cry shook the night with its far-reaching
thunders:  "Long live King Edward the Sixth!" and this made his
eyes kindle, and thrilled him with pride to his fingers' ends.
"Ah," he thought, "how grand and strange it seems--I AM KING!"

Our friends threaded their way slowly through the throngs upon the
bridge.  This structure, which had stood for six hundred years,
and had been a noisy and populous thoroughfare all that time, was
a curious affair, for a closely packed rank of stores and shops,
with family quarters overhead, stretched along both sides of it,
from one bank of the river to the other.  The Bridge was a sort of
town to itself; it had its inn, its beer-houses, its bakeries, its
haberdasheries, its food markets, its manufacturing industries,
and even its church.  It looked upon the two neighbours which it
linked together--London and Southwark--as being well enough as
suburbs, but not otherwise particularly important.  It was a close
corporation, so to speak; it was a narrow town, of a single street
a fifth of a mile long, its population was but a village
population and everybody in it knew all his fellow-townsmen
intimately, and had known their fathers and mothers before them--
and all their little family affairs into the bargain.  It had its
aristocracy, of course--its fine old families of butchers, and
bakers, and what-not, who had occupied the same old premises for
five or six hundred years, and knew the great history of the
Bridge from beginning to end, and all its strange legends; and who
always talked bridgy talk, and thought bridgy thoughts, and lied
in a long, level, direct, substantial bridgy way.  It was just the
sort of population to be narrow and ignorant and self-conceited.
Children were born on the Bridge, were reared there, grew to old
age, and finally died without ever having set a foot upon any part
of the world but London Bridge alone.  Such people would naturally
imagine that the mighty and interminable procession which moved
through its street night and day, with its confused roar of shouts
and cries, its neighings and bellowing and bleatings and its
muffled thunder-tramp, was the one great thing in this world, and
themselves somehow the proprietors of it.  And so they were, in
effect--at least they could exhibit it from their windows, and
did--for a consideration--whenever a returning king or hero gave
it a fleeting splendour, for there was no place like it for
affording a long, straight, uninterrupted view of marching
columns.

Men born and reared upon the Bridge found life unendurably dull
and inane elsewhere.  History tells of one of these who left the
Bridge at the age of seventy-one and retired to the country.  But
he could only fret and toss in his bed; he could not go to sleep,
the deep stillness was so painful, so awful, so oppressive.  When
he was worn out with it, at last, he fled back to his old home, a
lean and haggard spectre, and fell peacefully to rest and pleasant
dreams under the lulling music of the lashing waters and the boom
and crash and thunder of London Bridge.

In the times of which we are writing, the Bridge furnished 'object
lessons' in English history for its children--namely, the livid
and decaying heads of renowned men impaled upon iron spikes atop
of its gateways.  But we digress.

Hendon's lodgings were in the little inn on the Bridge.  As he
neared the door with his small friend, a rough voice said--

"So, thou'rt come at last!  Thou'lt not escape again, I warrant
thee; and if pounding thy bones to a pudding can teach thee
somewhat, thou'lt not keep us waiting another time, mayhap"--and
John Canty put out his hand to seize the boy.

Miles Hendon stepped in the way and said--

"Not too fast, friend.  Thou art needlessly rough, methinks.  What
is the lad to thee?"

"If it be any business of thine to make and meddle in others'
affairs, he is my son."

"'Tis a lie!" cried the little King, hotly.

"Boldly said, and I believe thee, whether thy small headpiece be
sound or cracked, my boy.  But whether this scurvy ruffian be thy
father or no, 'tis all one, he shall not have thee to beat thee
and abuse, according to his threat, so thou prefer to bide with
me."

"I do, I do--I know him not, I loathe him, and will die before I
will go with him."

"Then 'tis settled, and there is nought more to say."

"We will see, as to that!" exclaimed John Canty, striding past
Hendon to get at the boy; "by force shall he--"

"If thou do but touch him, thou animated offal, I will spit thee
like a goose!" said Hendon, barring the way and laying his hand
upon his sword hilt.  Canty drew back.  "Now mark ye," continued
Hendon, "I took this lad under my protection when a mob of such as
thou would have mishandled him, mayhap killed him; dost imagine I
will desert him now to a worser fate?--for whether thou art his
father or no--and sooth to say, I think it is a lie--a decent
swift death were better for such a lad than life in such brute
hands as thine.  So go thy ways, and set quick about it, for I
like not much bandying of words, being not over-patient in my
nature."

John Canty moved off, muttering threats and curses, and was
swallowed from sight in the crowd.  Hendon ascended three flights
of stairs to his room, with his charge, after ordering a meal to
be sent thither.  It was a poor apartment, with a shabby bed and
some odds and ends of old furniture in it, and was vaguely lighted
by a couple of sickly candles.  The little King dragged himself to
the bed and lay down upon it, almost exhausted with hunger and
fatigue.  He had been on his feet a good part of a day and a night
(for it was now two or three o'clock in the morning), and had
eaten nothing meantime.  He murmured drowsily--

"Prithee call me when the table is spread," and sank into a deep
sleep immediately.

A smile twinkled in Hendon's eye, and he said to himself--

"By the mass, the little beggar takes to one's quarters and usurps
one's bed with as natural and easy a grace as if he owned them--
with never a by-your-leave or so-please-it-you, or anything of the
sort.  In his diseased ravings he called himself the Prince of
Wales, and bravely doth he keep up the character.  Poor little
friendless rat, doubtless his mind has been disordered with ill-
usage.  Well, I will be his friend; I have saved him, and it
draweth me strongly to him; already I love the bold-tongued little
rascal.  How soldier-like he faced the smutty rabble and flung
back his high defiance!  And what a comely, sweet and gentle face
he hath, now that sleep hath conjured away its troubles and its
griefs.  I will teach him; I will cure his malady; yea, I will be
his elder brother, and care for him and watch over him; and whoso
would shame him or do him hurt may order his shroud, for though I
be burnt for it he shall need it!"

He bent over the boy and contemplated him with kind and pitying
interest, tapping the young cheek tenderly and smoothing back the
tangled curls with his great brown hand.  A slight shiver passed
over the boy's form.  Hendon muttered--

"See, now, how like a man it was to let him lie here uncovered and
fill his body with deadly rheums.  Now what shall I do? 'twill
wake him to take him up and put him within the bed, and he sorely
needeth sleep."

He looked about for extra covering, but finding none, doffed his
doublet and wrapped the lad in it, saying, "I am used to nipping
air and scant apparel, 'tis little I shall mind the cold!"--then
walked up and down the room, to keep his blood in motion,
soliloquising as before.

"His injured mind persuades him he is Prince of Wales; 'twill be
odd to have a Prince of Wales still with us, now that he that WAS
the prince is prince no more, but king--for this poor mind is set
upon the one fantasy, and will not reason out that now it should
cast by the prince and call itself the king. . . If my father
liveth still, after these seven years that I have heard nought
from home in my foreign dungeon, he will welcome the poor lad and
give him generous shelter for my sake; so will my good elder
brother, Arthur; my other brother, Hugh--but I will crack his
crown an HE interfere, the fox-hearted, ill-conditioned animal!
Yes, thither will we fare--and straightway, too."

A servant entered with a smoking meal, disposed it upon a small
deal table, placed the chairs, and took his departure, leaving
such cheap lodgers as these to wait upon themselves.  The door
slammed after him, and the noise woke the boy, who sprang to a
sitting posture, and shot a glad glance about him; then a grieved
look came into his face and he murmured to himself, with a deep
sigh, "Alack, it was but a dream, woe is me!"  Next he noticed
Miles Hendon's doublet--glanced from that to Hendon, comprehended
the sacrifice that had been made for him, and said, gently--

"Thou art good to me, yes, thou art very good to me.  Take it and
put it on--I shall not need it more."

Then he got up and walked to the washstand in the corner and stood
there, waiting.  Hendon said in a cheery voice--

"We'll have a right hearty sup and bite, now, for everything is
savoury and smoking hot, and that and thy nap together will make
thee a little man again, never fear!"

The boy made no answer, but bent a steady look, that was filled
with grave surprise, and also somewhat touched with impatience,
upon the tall knight of the sword.  Hendon was puzzled, and said--

"What's amiss?"

"Good sir, I would wash me."

"Oh, is that all?  Ask no permission of Miles Hendon for aught
thou cravest.  Make thyself perfectly free here, and welcome, with
all that are his belongings."

Still the boy stood, and moved not; more, he tapped the floor once
or twice with his small impatient foot.  Hendon was wholly
perplexed.  Said he--

"Bless us, what is it?"

"Prithee pour the water, and make not so many words!"

Hendon, suppressing a horse-laugh, and saying to himself, "By all
the saints, but this is admirable!" stepped briskly forward and
did the small insolent's bidding; then stood by, in a sort of
stupefaction, until the command, "Come--the towel!" woke him
sharply up.  He took up a towel, from under the boy's nose, and
handed it to him without comment.  He now proceeded to comfort his
own face with a wash, and while he was at it his adopted child
seated himself at the table and prepared to fall to.  Hendon
despatched his ablutions with alacrity, then drew back the other
chair and was about to place himself at table, when the boy said,
indignantly--

"Forbear!  Wouldst sit in the presence of the King?"

This blow staggered Hendon to his foundations.  He muttered to
himself, "Lo, the poor thing's madness is up with the time!  It
hath changed with the great change that is come to the realm, and
now in fancy is he KING!  Good lack, I must humour the conceit,
too--there is no other way--faith, he would order me to the Tower,
else!"

And pleased with this jest, he removed the chair from the table,
took his stand behind the King, and proceeded to wait upon him in
the courtliest way he was capable of.

While the King ate, the rigour of his royal dignity relaxed a
little, and with his growing contentment came a desire to talk.
He said--"I think thou callest thyself Miles Hendon, if I heard
thee aright?"

"Yes, Sire," Miles replied; then observed to himself, "If I MUST
humour the poor lad's madness, I must 'Sire' him, I must 'Majesty'
him, I must not go by halves, I must stick at nothing that
belongeth to the part I play, else shall I play it ill and work
evil to this charitable and kindly cause."

The King warmed his heart with a second glass of wine, and said--
"I would know thee--tell me thy story.  Thou hast a gallant way
with thee, and a noble--art nobly born?"

"We are of the tail of the nobility, good your Majesty.  My father
is a baronet--one of the smaller lords by knight service {2}--Sir
Richard Hendon of Hendon Hall, by Monk's Holm in Kent."

"The name has escaped my memory.  Go on--tell me thy story."

"'Tis not much, your Majesty, yet perchance it may beguile a short
half-hour for want of a better.  My father, Sir Richard, is very
rich, and of a most generous nature.  My mother died whilst I was
yet a boy.  I have two brothers:  Arthur, my elder, with a soul
like to his father's; and Hugh, younger than I, a mean spirit,
covetous, treacherous, vicious, underhanded--a reptile.  Such was
he from the cradle; such was he ten years past, when I last saw
him--a ripe rascal at nineteen, I being twenty then, and Arthur
twenty-two.  There is none other of us but the Lady Edith, my
cousin--she was sixteen then--beautiful, gentle, good, the
daughter of an earl, the last of her race, heiress of a great
fortune and a lapsed title.  My father was her guardian.  I loved
her and she loved me; but she was betrothed to Arthur from the
cradle, and Sir Richard would not suffer the contract to be
broken.  Arthur loved another maid, and bade us be of good cheer
and hold fast to the hope that delay and luck together would some
day give success to our several causes.  Hugh loved the Lady
Edith's fortune, though in truth he said it was herself he loved--
but then 'twas his way, alway, to say the one thing and mean the
other.  But he lost his arts upon the girl; he could deceive my
father, but none else.  My father loved him best of us all, and
trusted and believed him; for he was the youngest child, and
others hated him--these qualities being in all ages sufficient to
win a parent's dearest love; and he had a smooth persuasive
tongue, with an admirable gift of lying--and these be qualities
which do mightily assist a blind affection to cozen itself.  I was
wild--in troth I might go yet farther and say VERY wild, though
'twas a wildness of an innocent sort, since it hurt none but me,
brought shame to none, nor loss, nor had in it any taint of crime
or baseness, or what might not beseem mine honourable degree.

"Yet did my brother Hugh turn these faults to good account--he
seeing that our brother Arthur's health was but indifferent, and
hoping the worst might work him profit were I swept out of the
path--so--but 'twere a long tale, good my liege, and little worth
the telling.  Briefly, then, this brother did deftly magnify my
faults and make them crimes; ending his base work with finding a
silken ladder in mine apartments--conveyed thither by his own
means--and did convince my father by this, and suborned evidence
of servants and other lying knaves, that I was minded to carry off
my Edith and marry with her in rank defiance of his will.

"Three years of banishment from home and England might make a
soldier and a man of me, my father said, and teach me some degree
of wisdom.  I fought out my long probation in the continental
wars, tasting sumptuously of hard knocks, privation, and
adventure; but in my last battle I was taken captive, and during
the seven years that have waxed and waned since then, a foreign
dungeon hath harboured me.  Through wit and courage I won to the
free air at last, and fled hither straight; and am but just
arrived, right poor in purse and raiment, and poorer still in
knowledge of what these dull seven years have wrought at Hendon
Hall, its people and belongings.  So please you, sir, my meagre
tale is told."

"Thou hast been shamefully abused!" said the little King, with a
flashing eye.  "But I will right thee--by the cross will I!  The
King hath said it."

Then, fired by the story of Miles's wrongs, he loosed his tongue
and poured the history of his own recent misfortunes into the ears
of his astonished listener.  When he had finished, Miles said to
himself--

"Lo, what an imagination he hath!  Verily, this is no common mind;
else, crazed or sane, it could not weave so straight and gaudy a
tale as this out of the airy nothings wherewith it hath wrought
this curious romaunt.  Poor ruined little head, it shall not lack
friend or shelter whilst I bide with the living.  He shall never
leave my side; he shall be my pet, my little comrade.  And he
shall be cured!--ay, made whole and sound--then will he make
himself a name--and proud shall I be to say, 'Yes, he is mine--I
took him, a homeless little ragamuffin, but I saw what was in him,
and I said his name would be heard some day--behold him, observe
him--was I right?'"

The King spoke--in a thoughtful, measured voice--

"Thou didst save me injury and shame, perchance my life, and so my
crown.  Such service demandeth rich reward.  Name thy desire, and
so it be within the compass of my royal power, it is thine."

This fantastic suggestion startled Hendon out of his reverie.  He
was about to thank the King and put the matter aside with saying
he had only done his duty and desired no reward, but a wiser
thought came into his head, and he asked leave to be silent a few
moments and consider the gracious offer--an idea which the King
gravely approved, remarking that it was best to be not too hasty
with a thing of such great import.

Miles reflected during some moments, then said to himself, "Yes,
that is the thing to do--by any other means it were impossible to
get at it--and certes, this hour's experience has taught me
'twould be most wearing and inconvenient to continue it as it is.
Yes, I will propose it; 'twas a happy accident that I did not
throw the chance away."  Then he dropped upon one knee and said--

"My poor service went not beyond the limit of a subject's simple
duty, and therefore hath no merit; but since your Majesty is
pleased to hold it worthy some reward, I take heart of grace to
make petition to this effect.  Near four hundred years ago, as
your grace knoweth, there being ill blood betwixt John, King of
England, and the King of France, it was decreed that two champions
should fight together in the lists, and so settle the dispute by
what is called the arbitrament of God.  These two kings, and the
Spanish king, being assembled to witness and judge the conflict,
the French champion appeared; but so redoubtable was he, that our
English knights refused to measure weapons with him.  So the
matter, which was a weighty one, was like to go against the
English monarch by default.  Now in the Tower lay the Lord de
Courcy, the mightiest arm in England, stripped of his honours and
possessions, and wasting with long captivity.  Appeal was made to
him; he gave assent, and came forth arrayed for battle; but no
sooner did the Frenchman glimpse his huge frame and hear his
famous name but he fled away, and the French king's cause was
lost.  King John restored De Courcy's titles and possessions, and
said, 'Name thy wish and thou shalt have it, though it cost me
half my kingdom;' whereat De Courcy, kneeling, as I do now, made
answer, 'This, then, I ask, my liege; that I and my successors may
have and hold the privilege of remaining covered in the presence
of the kings of England, henceforth while the throne shall last.'
The boon was granted, as your Majesty knoweth; and there hath been
no time, these four hundred years, that that line has failed of an
heir; and so, even unto this day, the head of that ancient house
still weareth his hat or helm before the King's Majesty, without
let or hindrance, and this none other may do. {3}  Invoking this
precedent in aid of my prayer, I beseech the King to grant to me
but this one grace and privilege--to my more than sufficient
reward--and none other, to wit:  that I and my heirs, for ever,
may SIT in the presence of the Majesty of England!"

"Rise, Sir Miles Hendon, Knight," said the King, gravely--giving
the accolade with Hendon's sword--"rise, and seat thyself.  Thy
petition is granted.  Whilst England remains, and the crown
continues, the privilege shall not lapse."

His Majesty walked apart, musing, and Hendon dropped into a chair
at table, observing to himself, "'Twas a brave thought, and hath
wrought me a mighty deliverance; my legs are grievously wearied.
An I had not thought of that, I must have had to stand for weeks,
till my poor lad's wits are cured."  After a little, he went on,
"And so I am become a knight of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows!
A most odd and strange position, truly, for one so matter-of-fact
as I.  I will not laugh--no, God forbid, for this thing which is
so substanceless to me is REAL to him.  And to me, also, in one
way, it is not a falsity, for it reflects with truth the sweet and
generous spirit that is in him."  After a pause:  "Ah, what if he
should call me by my fine title before folk!--there'd be a merry
contrast betwixt my glory and my raiment!  But no matter, let him
call me what he will, so it please him; I shall be content."



Chapter XIII. The disappearance of the Prince.

A heavy drowsiness presently fell upon the two comrades.  The King
said--

"Remove these rags"--meaning his clothing.

Hendon disapparelled the boy without dissent or remark, tucked him
up in bed, then glanced about the room, saying to himself,
ruefully, "He hath taken my bed again, as before--marry, what
shall _I_ do?"  The little King observed his perplexity, and
dissipated it with a word.  He said, sleepily--

"Thou wilt sleep athwart the door, and guard it."  In a moment
more he was out of his troubles, in a deep slumber.

"Dear heart, he should have been born a king!" muttered Hendon,
admiringly; "he playeth the part to a marvel."

Then he stretched himself across the door, on the floor, saying
contentedly--

"I have lodged worse for seven years; 'twould be but ill gratitude
to Him above to find fault with this."

He dropped asleep as the dawn appeared.  Toward noon he rose,
uncovered his unconscious ward--a section at a time--and took his
measure with a string.  The King awoke, just as he had completed
his work, complained of the cold, and asked what he was doing.

"'Tis done, now, my liege," said Hendon; "I have a bit of business
outside, but will presently return; sleep thou again--thou needest
it.  There--let me cover thy head also--thou'lt be warm the
sooner."

The King was back in dreamland before this speech was ended.
Miles slipped softly out, and slipped as softly in again, in the
course of thirty or forty minutes, with a complete second-hand
suit of boy's clothing, of cheap material, and showing signs of
wear; but tidy, and suited to the season of the year.  He seated
himself, and began to overhaul his purchase, mumbling to himself--

"A longer purse would have got a better sort, but when one has not
the long purse one must be content with what a short one may do--

     "'There was a woman in our town,
        In our town did dwell--'

"He stirred, methinks--I must sing in a less thunderous key; 'tis
not good to mar his sleep, with this journey before him, and he so
wearied out, poor chap . . . This garment--'tis well enough--a
stitch here and another one there will set it aright.  This other
is better, albeit a stitch or two will not come amiss in it,
likewise . . . THESE be very good and sound, and will keep his
small feet warm and dry--an odd new thing to him, belike, since he
has doubtless been used to foot it bare, winters and summers the
same . . . Would thread were bread, seeing one getteth a year's
sufficiency for a farthing, and such a brave big needle without
cost, for mere love.  Now shall I have the demon's own time to
thread it!"

And so he had.  He did as men have always done, and probably
always will do, to the end of time--held the needle still, and
tried to thrust the thread through the eye, which is the opposite
of a woman's way.  Time and time again the thread missed the mark,
going sometimes on one side of the needle, sometimes on the other,
sometimes doubling up against the shaft; but he was patient,
having been through these experiences before, when he was
soldiering.  He succeeded at last, and took up the garment that
had lain waiting, meantime, across his lap, and began his work.

"The inn is paid--the breakfast that is to come, included--and
there is wherewithal left to buy a couple of donkeys and meet our
little costs for the two or three days betwixt this and the plenty
that awaits us at Hendon Hall--

     "'She loved her hus--'

"Body o' me!  I have driven the needle under my nail! . . . It
matters little--'tis not a novelty--yet 'tis not a convenience,
neither . . .We shall be merry there, little one, never doubt it!
Thy troubles will vanish there, and likewise thy sad distemper--

     "'She loved her husband dearilee,
       But another man--'

"These be noble large stitches!"--holding the garment up and
viewing it admiringly--"they have a grandeur and a majesty that do
cause these small stingy ones of the tailor-man to look mightily
paltry and plebeian--

     "'She loved her husband dearilee,
       But another man he loved she,--'

"Marry, 'tis done--a goodly piece of work, too, and wrought with
expedition.  Now will I wake him, apparel him, pour for him, feed
him, and then will we hie us to the mart by the Tabard Inn in
Southwark and--be pleased to rise, my liege!--he answereth not--
what ho, my liege!--of a truth must I profane his sacred person
with a touch, sith his slumber is deaf to speech.  What!"

He threw back the covers--the boy was gone!

He stared about him in speechless astonishment for a moment;
noticed for the first time that his ward's ragged raiment was also
missing; then he began to rage and storm and shout for the
innkeeper.  At that moment a servant entered with the breakfast.

"Explain, thou limb of Satan, or thy time is come!" roared the man
of war, and made so savage a spring toward the waiter that this
latter could not find his tongue, for the instant, for fright and
surprise.  "Where is the boy?"

In disjointed and trembling syllables the man gave the information
desired.

"You were hardly gone from the place, your worship, when a youth
came running and said it was your worship's will that the boy come
to you straight, at the bridge-end on the Southwark side.  I
brought him hither; and when he woke the lad and gave his message,
the lad did grumble some little for being disturbed 'so early,' as
he called it, but straightway trussed on his rags and went with
the youth, only saying it had been better manners that your
worship came yourself, not sent a stranger--and so--"

"And so thou'rt a fool!--a fool and easily cozened--hang all thy
breed!  Yet mayhap no hurt is done.  Possibly no harm is meant the
boy.  I will go fetch him.  Make the table ready.  Stay! the
coverings of the bed were disposed as if one lay beneath them--
happened that by accident?"

"I know not, good your worship.  I saw the youth meddle with them-
-he that came for the boy."

"Thousand deaths!  'Twas done to deceive me--'tis plain 'twas done
to gain time.  Hark ye!  Was that youth alone?"

"All alone, your worship."

"Art sure?"

"Sure, your worship."

"Collect thy scattered wits--bethink thee--take time, man."

After a moment's thought, the servant said--

"When he came, none came with him; but now I remember me that as
the two stepped into the throng of the Bridge, a ruffian-looking
man plunged out from some near place; and just as he was joining
them--"

"What THEN?--out with it!" thundered the impatient Hendon,
interrupting.

"Just then the crowd lapped them up and closed them in, and I saw
no more, being called by my master, who was in a rage because a
joint that the scrivener had ordered was forgot, though I take all
the saints to witness that to blame ME for that miscarriage were
like holding the unborn babe to judgment for sins com--"

"Out of my sight, idiot!  Thy prating drives me mad!  Hold!
Whither art flying?  Canst not bide still an instant?  Went they
toward Southwark?"

"Even so, your worship--for, as I said before, as to that
detestable joint, the babe unborn is no whit more blameless than--
"

"Art here YET!  And prating still!  Vanish, lest I throttle thee!"
The servitor vanished.  Hendon followed after him, passed him, and
plunged down the stairs two steps at a stride, muttering, "'Tis
that scurvy villain that claimed he was his son.  I have lost
thee, my poor little mad master--it is a bitter thought--and I had
come to love thee so!  No! by book and bell, NOT lost!  Not lost,
for I will ransack the land till I find thee again.  Poor child,
yonder is his breakfast--and mine, but I have no hunger now; so,
let the rats have it--speed, speed! that is the word!"  As he
wormed his swift way through the noisy multitudes upon the Bridge
he several times said to himself--clinging to the thought as if it
were a particularly pleasing one--"He grumbled, but he WENT--he
went, yes, because he thought Miles Hendon asked it, sweet lad--he
would ne'er have done it for another, I know it well."



Chapter XIV. 'Le Roi est mort--vive le Roi.'

Toward daylight of the same morning, Tom Canty stirred out of a
heavy sleep and opened his eyes in the dark.  He lay silent a few
moments, trying to analyse his confused thoughts and impressions,
and get some sort of meaning out of them; then suddenly he burst
out in a rapturous but guarded voice--

"I see it all, I see it all!  Now God be thanked, I am indeed
awake at last!  Come, joy! vanish, sorrow!  Ho, Nan! Bet! kick off
your straw and hie ye hither to my side, till I do pour into your
unbelieving ears the wildest madcap dream that ever the spirits of
night did conjure up to astonish the soul of man withal! . . . Ho,
Nan, I say!  Bet!"

A dim form appeared at his side, and a voice said--

"Wilt deign to deliver thy commands?"

"Commands? . . . O, woe is me, I know thy voice!  Speak thou--who
am I?"

"Thou?  In sooth, yesternight wert thou the Prince of Wales; to-
day art thou my most gracious liege, Edward, King of England."

Tom buried his head among his pillows, murmuring plaintively--

"Alack, it was no dream!  Go to thy rest, sweet sir--leave me to
my sorrows."

Tom slept again, and after a time he had this pleasant dream.  He
thought it was summer, and he was playing, all alone, in the fair
meadow called Goodman's Fields, when a dwarf only a foot high,
with long red whiskers and a humped back, appeared to him suddenly
and said, "Dig by that stump."  He did so, and found twelve bright
new pennies--wonderful riches!  Yet this was not the best of it;
for the dwarf said--

"I know thee.  Thou art a good lad, and a deserving; thy
distresses shall end, for the day of thy reward is come.  Dig here
every seventh day, and thou shalt find always the same treasure,
twelve bright new pennies.  Tell none--keep the secret."

Then the dwarf vanished, and Tom flew to Offal Court with his
prize, saying to himself, "Every night will I give my father a
penny; he will think I begged it, it will glad his heart, and I
shall no more be beaten.  One penny every week the good priest
that teacheth me shall have; mother, Nan, and Bet the other four.
We be done with hunger and rags, now, done with fears and frets
and savage usage."

In his dream he reached his sordid home all out of breath, but
with eyes dancing with grateful enthusiasm; cast four of his
pennies into his mother's lap and cried out--

"They are for thee!--all of them, every one!--for thee and Nan and
Bet--and honestly come by, not begged nor stolen!"

The happy and astonished mother strained him to her breast and
exclaimed--

"It waxeth late--may it please your Majesty to rise?"

Ah! that was not the answer he was expecting.  The dream had
snapped asunder--he was awake.

He opened his eyes--the richly clad First Lord of the Bedchamber
was kneeling by his couch.  The gladness of the lying dream faded
away--the poor boy recognised that he was still a captive and a
king.  The room was filled with courtiers clothed in purple
mantles--the mourning colour--and with noble servants of the
monarch.  Tom sat up in bed and gazed out from the heavy silken
curtains upon this fine company.

The weighty business of dressing began, and one courtier after
another knelt and paid his court and offered to the little King
his condolences upon his heavy loss, whilst the dressing
proceeded.  In the beginning, a shirt was taken up by the Chief
Equerry in Waiting, who passed it to the First Lord of the
Buckhounds, who passed it to the Second Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, who passed it to the Head Ranger of Windsor Forest,
who passed it to the Third Groom of the Stole, who passed it to
the Chancellor Royal of the Duchy of Lancaster, who passed it to
the Master of the Wardrobe, who passed it to Norroy King-at-Arms,
who passed it to the Constable of the Tower, who passed it to the
Chief Steward of the Household, who passed it to the Hereditary
Grand Diaperer, who passed it to the Lord High Admiral of England,
who passed it to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who passed it to
the First Lord of the Bedchamber, who took what was left of it and
put it on Tom.  Poor little wondering chap, it reminded him of
passing buckets at a fire.

Each garment in its turn had to go through this slow and solemn
process; consequently Tom grew very weary of the ceremony; so
weary that he felt an almost gushing gratefulness when he at last
saw his long silken hose begin the journey down the line and knew
that the end of the matter was drawing near.  But he exulted too
soon.  The First Lord of the Bedchamber received the hose and was
about to encase Tom's legs in them, when a sudden flush invaded
his face and he hurriedly hustled the things back into the hands
of the Archbishop of Canterbury with an astounded look and a
whispered, "See, my lord!" pointing to a something connected with
the hose.  The Archbishop paled, then flushed, and passed the hose
to the Lord High Admiral, whispering, "See, my lord!"  The Admiral
passed the hose to the Hereditary Grand Diaperer, and had hardly
breath enough in his body to ejaculate, "See, my lord!"  The hose
drifted backward along the line, to the Chief Steward of the
Household, the Constable of the Tower, Norroy King-at-Arms, the
Master of the Wardrobe, the Chancellor Royal of the Duchy of
Lancaster, the Third Groom of the Stole, the Head Ranger of
Windsor Forest, the Second Gentleman of the Bedchamber, the First
Lord of the Buckhounds,--accompanied always with that amazed and
frightened "See! see!"--till they finally reached the hands of the
Chief Equerry in Waiting, who gazed a moment, with a pallid face,
upon what had caused all this dismay, then hoarsely whispered,
"Body of my life, a tag gone from a truss-point!--to the Tower
with the Head Keeper of the King's Hose!"--after which he leaned
upon the shoulder of the First Lord of the Buckhounds to regather
his vanished strength whilst fresh hose, without any damaged
strings to them, were brought.

But all things must have an end, and so in time Tom Canty was in a
condition to get out of bed.  The proper official poured water,
the proper official engineered the washing, the proper official
stood by with a towel, and by-and-by Tom got safely through the
purifying stage and was ready for the services of the Hairdresser-
royal.  When he at length emerged from this master's hands, he was
a gracious figure and as pretty as a girl, in his mantle and
trunks of purple satin, and purple-plumed cap.  He now moved in
state toward his breakfast-room, through the midst of the courtly
assemblage; and as he passed, these fell back, leaving his way
free, and dropped upon their knees.

After breakfast he was conducted, with regal ceremony, attended by
his great officers and his guard of fifty Gentlemen Pensioners
bearing gilt battle-axes, to the throne-room, where he proceeded
to transact business of state.  His 'uncle,' Lord Hertford, took
his stand by the throne, to assist the royal mind with wise
counsel.

The body of illustrious men named by the late King as his
executors appeared, to ask Tom's approval of certain acts of
theirs--rather a form, and yet not wholly a form, since there was
no Protector as yet.  The Archbishop of Canterbury made report of
the decree of the Council of Executors concerning the obsequies of
his late most illustrious Majesty, and finished by reading the
signatures of the Executors, to wit:  the Archbishop of
Canterbury; the Lord Chancellor of England; William Lord St. John;
John Lord Russell; Edward Earl of Hertford; John Viscount Lisle;
Cuthbert Bishop of Durham--

Tom was not listening--an earlier clause of the document was
puzzling him.  At this point he turned and whispered to Lord
Hertford--

"What day did he say the burial hath been appointed for?"

"The sixteenth of the coming month, my liege."

"'Tis a strange folly.  Will he keep?"

Poor chap, he was still new to the customs of royalty; he was used
to seeing the forlorn dead of Offal Court hustled out of the way
with a very different sort of expedition.  However, the Lord
Hertford set his mind at rest with a word or two.

A secretary of state presented an order of the Council appointing
the morrow at eleven for the reception of the foreign ambassadors,
and desired the King's assent.

Tom turned an inquiring look toward Hertford, who whispered--

"Your Majesty will signify consent.  They come to testify their
royal masters' sense of the heavy calamity which hath visited your
Grace and the realm of England."

Tom did as he was bidden.  Another secretary began to read a
preamble concerning the expenses of the late King's household,
which had amounted to 28,000 pounds during the preceding six
months--a sum so vast that it made Tom Canty gasp; he gasped again
when the fact appeared that 20,000 pounds of this money was still
owing and unpaid; {4} and once more when it appeared that the
King's coffers were about empty, and his twelve hundred servants
much embarrassed for lack of the wages due them.  Tom spoke out,
with lively apprehension--

"We be going to the dogs, 'tis plain.  'Tis meet and necessary
that we take a smaller house and set the servants at large, sith
they be of no value but to make delay, and trouble one with
offices that harass the spirit and shame the soul, they
misbecoming any but a doll, that hath nor brains nor hands to help
itself withal.  I remember me of a small house that standeth over
against the fish-market, by Billingsgate--"

A sharp pressure upon Tom's arm stopped his foolish tongue and
sent a blush to his face; but no countenance there betrayed any
sign that this strange speech had been remarked or given concern.

A secretary made report that forasmuch as the late King had
provided in his will for conferring the ducal degree upon the Earl
of Hertford and raising his brother, Sir Thomas Seymour, to the
peerage, and likewise Hertford's son to an earldom, together with
similar aggrandisements to other great servants of the Crown, the
Council had resolved to hold a sitting on the 16th of February for
the delivering and confirming of these honours, and that meantime,
the late King not having granted, in writing, estates suitable to
the support of these dignities, the Council, knowing his private
wishes in that regard, had thought proper to grant to Seymour '500
pound lands,' and to Hertford's son '800 pound lands, and 300
pound of the next bishop's lands which should fall vacant,'--his
present Majesty being willing. {5}

Tom was about to blurt out something about the propriety of paying
the late King's debts first, before squandering all this money,
but a timely touch upon his arm, from the thoughtful Hertford,
saved him this indiscretion; wherefore he gave the royal assent,
without spoken comment, but with much inward discomfort.  While he
sat reflecting a moment over the ease with which he was doing
strange and glittering miracles, a happy thought shot into his
mind:  why not make his mother Duchess of Offal Court, and give
her an estate?  But a sorrowful thought swept it instantly away:
he was only a king in name, these grave veterans and great nobles
were his masters; to them his mother was only the creature of a
diseased mind; they would simply listen to his project with
unbelieving ears, then send for the doctor.

The dull work went tediously on.  Petitions were read, and
proclamations, patents, and all manner of wordy, repetitious, and
wearisome papers relating to the public business; and at last Tom
sighed pathetically and murmured to himself, "In what have I
offended, that the good God should take me away from the fields
and the free air and the sunshine, to shut me up here and make me
a king and afflict me so?"  Then his poor muddled head nodded a
while and presently drooped to his shoulder; and the business of
the empire came to a standstill for want of that august factor,
the ratifying power.  Silence ensued around the slumbering child,
and the sages of the realm ceased from their deliberations.

During the forenoon, Tom had an enjoyable hour, by permission of
his keepers, Hertford and St. John, with the Lady Elizabeth and
the little Lady Jane Grey; though the spirits of the princesses
were rather subdued by the mighty stroke that had fallen upon the
royal house; and at the end of the visit his 'elder sister'--
afterwards the 'Bloody Mary' of history--chilled him with a solemn
interview which had but one merit in his eyes, its brevity.  He
had a few moments to himself, and then a slim lad of about twelve
years of age was admitted to his presence, whose clothing, except
his snowy ruff and the laces about his wrists, was of black,--
doublet, hose, and all.  He bore no badge of mourning but a knot
of purple ribbon on his shoulder.  He advanced hesitatingly, with
head bowed and bare, and dropped upon one knee in front of Tom.
Tom sat still and contemplated him soberly a moment.  Then he
said--

"Rise, lad.  Who art thou.  What wouldst have?"

The boy rose, and stood at graceful ease, but with an aspect of
concern in his face.  He said--

"Of a surety thou must remember me, my lord.  I am thy whipping-
boy."

"My WHIPPING-boy?"

"The same, your Grace.  I am Humphrey--Humphrey Marlow."

Tom perceived that here was someone whom his keepers ought to have
posted him about.  The situation was delicate.  What should he
do?--pretend he knew this lad, and then betray by his every
utterance that he had never heard of him before?  No, that would
not do.  An idea came to his relief:  accidents like this might be
likely to happen with some frequency, now that business urgencies
would often call Hertford and St. John from his side, they being
members of the Council of Executors; therefore perhaps it would be
well to strike out a plan himself to meet the requirements of such
emergencies.  Yes, that would be a wise course--he would practise
on this boy, and see what sort of success he might achieve.  So he
stroked his brow perplexedly a moment or two, and presently said--

"Now I seem to remember thee somewhat--but my wit is clogged and
dim with suffering--"

"Alack, my poor master!" ejaculated the whipping-boy, with
feeling; adding, to himself, "In truth 'tis as they said--his mind
is gone--alas, poor soul!  But misfortune catch me, how am I
forgetting!  They said one must not seem to observe that aught is
wrong with him."

"'Tis strange how my memory doth wanton with me these days," said
Tom.  "But mind it not--I mend apace--a little clue doth often
serve to bring me back again the things and names which had
escaped me.  (And not they, only, forsooth, but e'en such as I
ne'er heard before--as this lad shall see.)  Give thy business