
speech."

"'Tis matter of small weight, my liege, yet will I touch upon it,
an' it please your Grace.  Two days gone by, when your Majesty
faulted thrice in your Greek--in the morning lessons,--dost
remember it?"

"Y-e-s--methinks I do.  (It is not much of a lie--an' I had
meddled with the Greek at all, I had not faulted simply thrice,
but forty times.)  Yes, I do recall it, now--go on."

"The master, being wroth with what he termed such slovenly and
doltish work, did promise that he would soundly whip me for it--
and--"

"Whip THEE!" said Tom, astonished out of his presence of mind.
"Why should he whip THEE for faults of mine?"

"Ah, your Grace forgetteth again.  He always scourgeth me when
thou dost fail in thy lessons."

"True, true--I had forgot.  Thou teachest me in private--then if I
fail, he argueth that thy office was lamely done, and--"

"Oh, my liege, what words are these?  I, the humblest of thy
servants, presume to teach THEE?"

"Then where is thy blame?  What riddle is this?  Am I in truth
gone mad, or is it thou?  Explain--speak out."

"But, good your Majesty, there's nought that needeth simplifying.-
-None may visit the sacred person of the Prince of Wales with
blows; wherefore, when he faulteth, 'tis I that take them; and
meet it is and right, for that it is mine office and my
livelihood." {1}

Tom stared at the tranquil boy, observing to himself, "Lo, it is a
wonderful thing,--a most strange and curious trade; I marvel they
have not hired a boy to take my combings and my dressings for me--
would heaven they would!--an' they will do this thing, I will take
my lashings in mine own person, giving God thanks for the change."
Then he said aloud--

"And hast thou been beaten, poor friend, according to the
promise?"

"No, good your Majesty, my punishment was appointed for this day,
and peradventure it may be annulled, as unbefitting the season of
mourning that is come upon us; I know not, and so have made bold
to come hither and remind your Grace about your gracious promise
to intercede in my behalf--"

"With the master?  To save thee thy whipping?"

"Ah, thou dost remember!"

"My memory mendeth, thou seest.  Set thy mind at ease--thy back
shall go unscathed--I will see to it."

"Oh, thanks, my good lord!" cried the boy, dropping upon his knee
again.  "Mayhap I have ventured far enow; and yet--"

Seeing Master Humphrey hesitate, Tom encouraged him to go on,
saying he was "in the granting mood."

"Then will I speak it out, for it lieth near my heart.  Sith thou
art no more Prince of Wales but King, thou canst order matters as
thou wilt, with none to say thee nay; wherefore it is not in
reason that thou wilt longer vex thyself with dreary studies, but
wilt burn thy books and turn thy mind to things less irksome.
Then am I ruined, and mine orphan sisters with me!"

"Ruined?  Prithee how?"

"My back is my bread, O my gracious liege! if it go idle, I
starve.  An' thou cease from study mine office is gone thou'lt
need no whipping-boy.  Do not turn me away!"

Tom was touched with this pathetic distress.  He said, with a
right royal burst of generosity--

"Discomfort thyself no further, lad.  Thine office shall be
permanent in thee and thy line for ever."  Then he struck the boy
a light blow on the shoulder with the flat of his sword,
exclaiming, "Rise, Humphrey Marlow, Hereditary Grand Whipping-Boy
to the Royal House of England!  Banish sorrow--I will betake me to
my books again, and study so ill that they must in justice treble
thy wage, so mightily shall the business of thine office be
augmented."

The grateful Humphrey responded fervidly--

"Thanks, O most noble master, this princely lavishness doth far
surpass my most distempered dreams of fortune.  Now shall I be
happy all my days, and all the house of Marlow after me."

Tom had wit enough to perceive that here was a lad who could be
useful to him.  He encouraged Humphrey to talk, and he was nothing
loath.  He was delighted to believe that he was helping in Tom's
'cure'; for always, as soon as he had finished calling back to
Tom's diseased mind the various particulars of his experiences and
adventures in the royal school-room and elsewhere about the
palace, he noticed that Tom was then able to 'recall' the
circumstances quite clearly.  At the end of an hour Tom found
himself well freighted with very valuable information concerning
personages and matters pertaining to the Court; so he resolved to
draw instruction from this source daily; and to this end he would
give order to admit Humphrey to the royal closet whenever he might
come, provided the Majesty of England was not engaged with other
people.  Humphrey had hardly been dismissed when my Lord Hertford
arrived with more trouble for Tom.

He said that the Lords of the Council, fearing that some
overwrought report of the King's damaged health might have leaked
out and got abroad, they deemed it wise and best that his Majesty
should begin to dine in public after a day or two--his wholesome
complexion and vigorous step, assisted by a carefully guarded
repose of manner and ease and grace of demeanour, would more
surely quiet the general pulse--in case any evil rumours HAD gone
about--than any other scheme that could be devised.

Then the Earl proceeded, very delicately, to instruct Tom as to
the observances proper to the stately occasion, under the rather
thin disguise of 'reminding' him concerning things already known
to him; but to his vast gratification it turned out that Tom
needed very little help in this line--he had been making use of
Humphrey in that direction, for Humphrey had mentioned that within
a few days he was to begin to dine in public; having gathered it
from the swift-winged gossip of the Court.  Tom kept these facts
to himself, however.

Seeing the royal memory so improved, the Earl ventured to apply a
few tests to it, in an apparently casual way, to find out how far
its amendment had progressed.  The results were happy, here and
there, in spots--spots where Humphrey's tracks remained--and on
the whole my lord was greatly pleased and encouraged.  So
encouraged was he, indeed, that he spoke up and said in a quite
hopeful voice--

"Now am I persuaded that if your Majesty will but tax your memory
yet a little further, it will resolve the puzzle of the Great
Seal--a loss which was of moment yesterday, although of none to-
day, since its term of service ended with our late lord's life.
May it please your Grace to make the trial?"

Tom was at sea--a Great Seal was something which he was totally
unacquainted with.  After a moment's hesitation he looked up
innocently and asked--

"What was it like, my lord?"

The Earl started, almost imperceptibly, muttering to himself,
"Alack, his wits are flown again!--it was ill wisdom to lead him
on to strain them"--then he deftly turned the talk to other
matters, with the purpose of sweeping the unlucky seal out of
Tom's thoughts--a purpose which easily succeeded.



Chapter XV. Tom as King.

The next day the foreign ambassadors came, with their gorgeous
trains; and Tom, throned in awful state, received them.  The
splendours of the scene delighted his eye and fired his
imagination at first, but the audience was long and dreary, and so
were most of the addresses--wherefore, what began as a pleasure
grew into weariness and home-sickness by-and-by.  Tom said the
words which Hertford put into his mouth from time to time, and
tried hard to acquit himself satisfactorily, but he was too new to
such things, and too ill at ease to accomplish more than a
tolerable success.  He looked sufficiently like a king, but he was
ill able to feel like one.  He was cordially glad when the
ceremony was ended.

The larger part of his day was 'wasted'--as he termed it, in his
own mind--in labours pertaining to his royal office.  Even the two
hours devoted to certain princely pastimes and recreations were
rather a burden to him than otherwise, they were so fettered by
restrictions and ceremonious observances.  However, he had a
private hour with his whipping-boy which he counted clear gain,
since he got both entertainment and needful information out of it.

The third day of Tom Canty's kingship came and went much as the
others had done, but there was a lifting of his cloud in one way--
he felt less uncomfortable than at first; he was getting a little
used to his circumstances and surroundings; his chains still
galled, but not all the time; he found that the presence and
homage of the great afflicted and embarrassed him less and less
sharply with every hour that drifted over his head.

But for one single dread, he could have seen the fourth day
approach without serious distress--the dining in public; it was to
begin that day.  There were greater matters in the programme--for
on that day he would have to preside at a council which would take
his views and commands concerning the policy to be pursued toward
various foreign nations scattered far and near over the great
globe; on that day, too, Hertford would be formally chosen to the
grand office of Lord Protector; other things of note were
appointed for that fourth day, also; but to Tom they were all
insignificant compared with the ordeal of dining all by himself
with a multitude of curious eyes fastened upon him and a multitude
of mouths whispering comments upon his performance,--and upon his
mistakes, if he should be so unlucky as to make any.

Still, nothing could stop that fourth day, and so it came.  It
found poor Tom low-spirited and absent-minded, and this mood
continued; he could not shake it off.  The ordinary duties of the
morning dragged upon his hands, and wearied him.  Once more he
felt the sense of captivity heavy upon him.

Late in the forenoon he was in a large audience-chamber,
conversing with the Earl of Hertford and dully awaiting the
striking of the hour appointed for a visit of ceremony from a
considerable number of great officials and courtiers.

After a little while, Tom, who had wandered to a window and become
interested in the life and movement of the great highway beyond
the palace gates--and not idly interested, but longing with all
his heart to take part in person in its stir and freedom--saw the
van of a hooting and shouting mob of disorderly men, women, and
children of the lowest and poorest degree approaching from up the
road.

"I would I knew what 'tis about!" he exclaimed, with all a boy's
curiosity in such happenings.

"Thou art the King!" solemnly responded the Earl, with a
reverence.  "Have I your Grace's leave to act?"

"O blithely, yes!  O gladly, yes!" exclaimed Tom excitedly, adding
to himself with a lively sense of satisfaction, "In truth, being a
king is not all dreariness--it hath its compensations and
conveniences."

The Earl called a page, and sent him to the captain of the guard
with the order--

"Let the mob be halted, and inquiry made concerning the occasion
of its movement.  By the King's command!"

A few seconds later a long rank of the royal guards, cased in
flashing steel, filed out at the gates and formed across the
highway in front of the multitude.  A messenger returned, to
report that the crowd were following a man, a woman, and a young
girl to execution for crimes committed against the peace and
dignity of the realm.

Death--and a violent death--for these poor unfortunates!  The
thought wrung Tom's heart-strings.  The spirit of compassion took
control of him, to the exclusion of all other considerations; he
never thought of the offended laws, or of the grief or loss which
these three criminals had inflicted upon their victims; he could
think of nothing but the scaffold and the grisly fate hanging over
the heads of the condemned.  His concern made him even forget, for
the moment, that he was but the false shadow of a king, not the
substance; and before he knew it he had blurted out the command--

"Bring them here!"

Then he blushed scarlet, and a sort of apology sprung to his lips;
but observing that his order had wrought no sort of surprise in
the Earl or the waiting page, he suppressed the words he was about
to utter.  The page, in the most matter-of-course way, made a
profound obeisance and retired backwards out of the room to
deliver the command.  Tom experienced a glow of pride and a
renewed sense of the compensating advantages of the kingly office.
He said to himself, "Truly it is like what I was used to feel when
I read the old priest's tales, and did imagine mine own self a
prince, giving law and command to all, saying 'Do this, do that,'
whilst none durst offer let or hindrance to my will."

Now the doors swung open; one high-sounding title after another
was announced, the personages owning them followed, and the place
was quickly half-filled with noble folk and finery.  But Tom was
hardly conscious of the presence of these people, so wrought up
was he and so intensely absorbed in that other and more
interesting matter.  He seated himself absently in his chair of
state, and turned his eyes upon the door with manifestations of
impatient expectancy; seeing which, the company forbore to trouble
him, and fell to chatting a mixture of public business and court
gossip one with another.

In a little while the measured tread of military men was heard
approaching, and the culprits entered the presence in charge of an
under-sheriff and escorted by a detail of the king's guard.  The
civil officer knelt before Tom, then stood aside; the three doomed
persons knelt, also, and remained so; the guard took position
behind Tom's chair.  Tom scanned the prisoners curiously.
Something about the dress or appearance of the man had stirred a
vague memory in him.  "Methinks I have seen this man ere now . . .
but the when or the where fail me"--such was Tom's thought.  Just
then the man glanced quickly up and quickly dropped his face
again, not being able to endure the awful port of sovereignty; but
the one full glimpse of the face which Tom got was sufficient.  He
said to himself:  "Now is the matter clear; this is the stranger
that plucked Giles Witt out of the Thames, and saved his life,
that windy, bitter, first day of the New Year--a brave good deed--
pity he hath been doing baser ones and got himself in this sad
case . . . I have not forgot the day, neither the hour; by reason
that an hour after, upon the stroke of eleven, I did get a hiding
by the hand of Gammer Canty which was of so goodly and admired
severity that all that went before or followed after it were but
fondlings and caresses by comparison."

Tom now ordered that the woman and the girl be removed from the
presence for a little time; then addressed himself to the under-
sheriff, saying--

"Good sir, what is this man's offence?"

The officer knelt, and answered--

"So please your Majesty, he hath taken the life of a subject by
poison."

Tom's compassion for the prisoner, and admiration of him as the
daring rescuer of a drowning boy, experienced a most damaging
shock.

"The thing was proven upon him?" he asked.

"Most clearly, sire."

Tom sighed, and said--

"Take him away--he hath earned his death.  'Tis a pity, for he was
a brave heart--na--na, I mean he hath the LOOK of it!"

The prisoner clasped his hands together with sudden energy, and
wrung them despairingly, at the same time appealing imploringly to
the 'King' in broken and terrified phrases--

"O my lord the King, an' thou canst pity the lost, have pity upon
me!  I am innocent--neither hath that wherewith I am charged been
more than but lamely proved--yet I speak not of that; the judgment
is gone forth against me and may not suffer alteration; yet in
mine extremity I beg a boon, for my doom is more than I can bear.
A grace, a grace, my lord the King! in thy royal compassion grant
my prayer--give commandment that I be hanged!"

Tom was amazed.  This was not the outcome he had looked for.

"Odds my life, a strange BOON!  Was it not the fate intended
thee?"

"O good my liege, not so!  It is ordered that I be BOILED ALIVE!"

The hideous surprise of these words almost made Tom spring from
his chair.  As soon as he could recover his wits he cried out--

"Have thy wish, poor soul! an' thou had poisoned a hundred men
thou shouldst not suffer so miserable a death."

The prisoner bowed his face to the ground and burst into
passionate expressions of gratitude--ending with--

"If ever thou shouldst know misfortune--which God forefend!--may
thy goodness to me this day be remembered and requited!"

Tom turned to the Earl of Hertford, and said--

"My lord, is it believable that there was warrant for this man's
ferocious doom?"

"It is the law, your Grace--for poisoners.  In Germany coiners be
boiled to death in OIL--not cast in of a sudden, but by a rope let
down into the oil by degrees, and slowly; first the feet, then the
legs, then--"

"O prithee no more, my lord, I cannot bear it!" cried Tom,
covering his eyes with his hands to shut out the picture.  "I
beseech your good lordship that order be taken to change this law-
-oh, let no more poor creatures be visited with its tortures."

The Earl's face showed profound gratification, for he was a man of
merciful and generous impulses--a thing not very common with his
class in that fierce age.  He said--

"These your Grace's noble words have sealed its doom.  History
will remember it to the honour of your royal house."

The under-sheriff was about to remove his prisoner; Tom gave him a
sign to wait; then he said--

"Good sir, I would look into this matter further.  The man has
said his deed was but lamely proved.  Tell me what thou knowest."

"If the King's grace please, it did appear upon the trial that
this man entered into a house in the hamlet of Islington where one
lay sick--three witnesses say it was at ten of the clock in the
morning, and two say it was some minutes later--the sick man being
alone at the time, and sleeping--and presently the man came forth
again and went his way.  The sick man died within the hour, being
torn with spasms and retchings."

"Did any see the poison given?  Was poison found?"

"Marry, no, my liege."

"Then how doth one know there was poison given at all?"

"Please your Majesty, the doctors testified that none die with
such symptoms but by poison."

Weighty evidence, this, in that simple age.  Tom recognised its
formidable nature, and said--

"The doctor knoweth his trade--belike they were right.  The matter
hath an ill-look for this poor man."

"Yet was not this all, your Majesty; there is more and worse.
Many testified that a witch, since gone from the village, none
know whither, did foretell, and speak it privately in their ears,
that the sick man WOULD DIE BY POISON--and more, that a stranger
would give it--a stranger with brown hair and clothed in a worn
and common garb; and surely this prisoner doth answer woundily to
the bill.  Please your Majesty to give the circumstance that
solemn weight which is its due, seeing it was FORETOLD."

This was an argument of tremendous force in that superstitious
day.  Tom felt that the thing was settled; if evidence was worth
anything, this poor fellow's guilt was proved.  Still he offered
the prisoner a chance, saying--

"If thou canst say aught in thy behalf, speak."

"Nought that will avail, my King.  I am innocent, yet cannot I
make it appear.  I have no friends, else might I show that I was
not in Islington that day; so also might I show that at that hour
they name I was above a league away, seeing I was at Wapping Old
Stairs; yea more, my King, for I could show, that whilst they say
I was TAKING life, I was SAVING it.  A drowning boy--"

"Peace!  Sheriff, name the day the deed was done!"

"At ten in the morning, or some minutes later, the first day of
the New Year, most illustrious--"

"Let the prisoner go free--it is the King's will!"

Another blush followed this unregal outburst, and he covered his
indecorum as well as he could by adding--

"It enrageth me that a man should be hanged upon such idle, hare-
brained evidence!"

A low buzz of admiration swept through the assemblage.  It was not
admiration of the decree that had been delivered by Tom, for the
propriety or expediency of pardoning a convicted poisoner was a
thing which few there would have felt justified in either
admitting or admiring--no, the admiration was for the intelligence
and spirit which Tom had displayed.  Some of the low-voiced
remarks were to this effect--

"This is no mad king--he hath his wits sound."

"How sanely he put his questions--how like his former natural self
was this abrupt imperious disposal of the matter!"

"God be thanked, his infirmity is spent!  This is no weakling, but
a king.  He hath borne himself like to his own father."

The air being filled with applause, Tom's ear necessarily caught a
little of it.  The effect which this had upon him was to put him
greatly at his ease, and also to charge his system with very
gratifying sensations.

However, his juvenile curiosity soon rose superior to these
pleasant thoughts and feelings; he was eager to know what sort of
deadly mischief the woman and the little girl could have been
about; so, by his command, the two terrified and sobbing creatures
were brought before him.

"What is it that these have done?" he inquired of the sheriff.

"Please your Majesty, a black crime is charged upon them, and
clearly proven; wherefore the judges have decreed, according to
the law, that they be hanged.  They sold themselves to the devil--
such is their crime."

Tom shuddered.  He had been taught to abhor people who did this
wicked thing.  Still, he was not going to deny himself the
pleasure of feeding his curiosity for all that; so he asked--

"Where was this done?--and when?"

"On a midnight in December, in a ruined church, your Majesty."

Tom shuddered again.

"Who was there present?"

"Only these two, your grace--and THAT OTHER."

"Have these confessed?"

"Nay, not so, sire--they do deny it."

"Then prithee, how was it known?"

"Certain witness did see them wending thither, good your Majesty;
this bred the suspicion, and dire effects have since confirmed and
justified it.  In particular, it is in evidence that through the
wicked power so obtained, they did invoke and bring about a storm
that wasted all the region round about.  Above forty witnesses
have proved the storm; and sooth one might have had a thousand,
for all had reason to remember it, sith all had suffered by it."

"Certes this is a serious matter."  Tom turned this dark piece of
scoundrelism over in his mind a while, then asked--

"Suffered the woman also by the storm?"

Several old heads among the assemblage nodded their recognition of
the wisdom of this question.  The sheriff, however, saw nothing
consequential in the inquiry; he answered, with simple directness-
-

"Indeed did she, your Majesty, and most righteously, as all aver.
Her habitation was swept away, and herself and child left
shelterless."

"Methinks the power to do herself so ill a turn was dearly bought.
She had been cheated, had she paid but a farthing for it; that she
paid her soul, and her child's, argueth that she is mad; if she is
mad she knoweth not what she doth, therefore sinneth not."

The elderly heads nodded recognition of Tom's wisdom once more,
and one individual murmured, "An' the King be mad himself,
according to report, then is it a madness of a sort that would
improve the sanity of some I wot of, if by the gentle providence
of God they could but catch it."

"What age hath the child?" asked Tom.

"Nine years, please your Majesty."

"By the law of England may a child enter into covenant and sell
itself, my lord?" asked Tom, turning to a learned judge.

"The law doth not permit a child to make or meddle in any weighty
matter, good my liege, holding that its callow wit unfitteth it to
cope with the riper wit and evil schemings of them that are its
elders.  The DEVIL may buy a child, if he so choose, and the child
agree thereto, but not an Englishman--in this latter case the
contract would be null and void."

"It seemeth a rude unchristian thing, and ill contrived, that
English law denieth privileges to Englishmen to waste them on the
devil!" cried Tom, with honest heat.

This novel view of the matter excited many smiles, and was stored
away in many heads to be repeated about the Court as evidence of
Tom's originality as well as progress toward mental health.

The elder culprit had ceased from sobbing, and was hanging upon
Tom's words with an excited interest and a growing hope.  Tom
noticed this, and it strongly inclined his sympathies toward her
in her perilous and unfriended situation.  Presently he asked--

"How wrought they to bring the storm?"

"BY PULLING OFF THEIR STOCKINGS, sire."

This astonished Tom, and also fired his curiosity to fever heat.
He said, eagerly--

"It is wonderful!  Hath it always this dread effect?"

"Always, my liege--at least if the woman desire it, and utter the
needful words, either in her mind or with her tongue."

Tom turned to the woman, and said with impetuous zeal--

"Exert thy power--I would see a storm!"

There was a sudden paling of cheeks in the superstitious
assemblage, and a general, though unexpressed, desire to get out
of the place--all of which was lost upon Tom, who was dead to
everything but the proposed cataclysm.  Seeing a puzzled and
astonished look in the woman's face, he added, excitedly--

"Never fear--thou shalt be blameless.  More--thou shalt go free--
none shall touch thee.  Exert thy power."

"Oh, my lord the King, I have it not--I have been falsely
accused."

"Thy fears stay thee.  Be of good heart, thou shalt suffer no
harm.  Make a storm--it mattereth not how small a one--I require
nought great or harmful, but indeed prefer the opposite--do this
and thy life is spared--thou shalt go out free, with thy child,
bearing the King's pardon, and safe from hurt or malice from any
in the realm."

The woman prostrated herself, and protested, with tears, that she
had no power to do the miracle, else she would gladly win her
child's life alone, and be content to lose her own, if by
obedience to the King's command so precious a grace might be
acquired.

Tom urged--the woman still adhered to her declarations.  Finally
he said--

"I think the woman hath said true.  An' MY mother were in her
place and gifted with the devil's functions, she had not stayed a
moment to call her storms and lay the whole land in ruins, if the
saving of my forfeit life were the price she got!  It is argument
that other mothers are made in like mould.  Thou art free,
goodwife--thou and thy child--for I do think thee innocent.  NOW
thou'st nought to fear, being pardoned--pull off thy stockings!--
an' thou canst make me a storm, thou shalt be rich!"

The redeemed creature was loud in her gratitude, and proceeded to
obey, whilst Tom looked on with eager expectancy, a little marred
by apprehension; the courtiers at the same time manifesting
decided discomfort and uneasiness.  The woman stripped her own
feet and her little girl's also, and plainly did her best to
reward the King's generosity with an earthquake, but it was all a
failure and a disappointment.  Tom sighed, and said--

"There, good soul, trouble thyself no further, thy power is
departed out of thee.  Go thy way in peace; and if it return to
thee at any time, forget me not, but fetch me a storm." {13}



Chapter XVI. The State Dinner.

The dinner hour drew near--yet strangely enough, the thought
brought but slight discomfort to Tom, and hardly any terror.  The
morning's experiences had wonderfully built up his confidence; the
poor little ash-cat was already more wonted to his strange garret,
after four days' habit, than a mature person could have become in
a full month.  A child's facility in accommodating itself to
circumstances was never more strikingly illustrated.

Let us privileged ones hurry to the great banqueting-room and have
a glance at matters there whilst Tom is being made ready for the
imposing occasion.  It is a spacious apartment, with gilded
pillars and pilasters, and pictured walls and ceilings.  At the
door stand tall guards, as rigid as statues, dressed in rich and
picturesque costumes, and bearing halberds.  In a high gallery
which runs all around the place is a band of musicians and a
packed company of citizens of both sexes, in brilliant attire.  In
the centre of the room, upon a raised platform, is Tom's table.
Now let the ancient chronicler speak:

"A gentleman enters the room bearing a rod, and along with him
another bearing a tablecloth, which, after they have both kneeled
three times with the utmost veneration, he spreads upon the table,
and after kneeling again they both retire; then come two others,
one with the rod again, the other with a salt-cellar, a plate, and
bread; when they have kneeled as the others had done, and placed
what was brought upon the table, they too retire with the same
ceremonies performed by the first; at last come two nobles, richly
clothed, one bearing a tasting-knife, who, after prostrating
themselves three times in the most graceful manner, approach and
rub the table with bread and salt, with as much awe as if the King
had been present." {6}

So end the solemn preliminaries.  Now, far down the echoing
corridors we hear a bugle-blast, and the indistinct cry, "Place
for the King!  Way for the King's most excellent majesty!"  These
sounds are momently repeated--they grow nearer and nearer--and
presently, almost in our faces, the martial note peals and the cry
rings out, "Way for the King!"  At this instant the shining
pageant appears, and files in at the door, with a measured march.
Let the chronicler speak again:--

"First come Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, Knights of the Garter, all
richly dressed and bareheaded; next comes the Chancellor, between
two, one of which carries the royal sceptre, the other the Sword
of State in a red scabbard, studded with golden fleurs-de-lis, the
point upwards; next comes the King himself--whom, upon his
appearing, twelve trumpets and many drums salute with a great
burst of welcome, whilst all in the galleries rise in their
places, crying 'God save the King!'  After him come nobles
attached to his person, and on his right and left march his guard
of honour, his fifty Gentlemen Pensioners, with gilt battle-axes."

This was all fine and pleasant.  Tom's pulse beat high, and a glad
light was in his eye.  He bore himself right gracefully, and all
the more so because he was not thinking of how he was doing it,
his mind being charmed and occupied with the blithe sights and
sounds about him--and besides, nobody can be very ungraceful in
nicely-fitting beautiful clothes after he has grown a little used
to them--especially if he is for the moment unconscious of them.
Tom remembered his instructions, and acknowledged his greeting
with a slight inclination of his plumed head, and a courteous "I
thank ye, my good people."

He seated himself at table, without removing his cap; and did it
without the least embarrassment; for to eat with one's cap on was
the one solitary royal custom upon which the kings and the Cantys
met upon common ground, neither party having any advantage over
the other in the matter of old familiarity with it.  The pageant
broke up and grouped itself picturesquely, and remained
bareheaded.

Now to the sound of gay music the Yeomen of the Guard entered,--
"the tallest and mightiest men in England, they being carefully
selected in this regard"--but we will let the chronicler tell
about it:--

"The Yeomen of the Guard entered, bareheaded, clothed in scarlet,
with golden roses upon their backs; and these went and came,
bringing in each turn a course of dishes, served in plate.  These
dishes were received by a gentleman in the same order they were
brought, and placed upon the table, while the taster gave to each
guard a mouthful to eat of the particular dish he had brought, for
fear of any poison."

Tom made a good dinner, notwithstanding he was conscious that
hundreds of eyes followed each morsel to his mouth and watched him
eat it with an interest which could not have been more intense if
it had been a deadly explosive and was expected to blow him up and
scatter him all about the place.  He was careful not to hurry, and
equally careful not to do anything whatever for himself, but wait
till the proper official knelt down and did it for him.  He got
through without a mistake--flawless and precious triumph.

When the meal was over at last and he marched away in the midst of
his bright pageant, with the happy noises in his ears of blaring
bugles, rolling drums, and thundering acclamations, he felt that
if he had seen the worst of dining in public it was an ordeal
which he would be glad to endure several times a day if by that
means he could but buy himself free from some of the more
formidable requirements of his royal office.



Chapter XVII. Foo-foo the First.

Miles Hendon hurried along toward the Southwark end of the bridge,
keeping a sharp look-out for the persons he sought, and hoping and
expecting to overtake them presently.  He was disappointed in
this, however.  By asking questions, he was enabled to track them
part of the way through Southwark; then all traces ceased, and he
was perplexed as to how to proceed.  Still, he continued his
efforts as best he could during the rest of the day.  Nightfall
found him leg-weary, half-famished, and his desire as far from
accomplishment as ever; so he supped at the Tabard Inn and went to
bed, resolved to make an early start in the morning, and give the
town an exhaustive search.  As he lay thinking and planning, he
presently began to reason thus:  The boy would escape from the
ruffian, his reputed father, if possible; would he go back to
London and seek his former haunts?  No, he would not do that, he
would avoid recapture.  What, then, would he do?  Never having had
a friend in the world, or a protector, until he met Miles Hendon,
he would naturally try to find that friend again, provided the
effort did not require him to go toward London and danger.  He
would strike for Hendon Hall, that is what he would do, for he
knew Hendon was homeward bound and there he might expect to find
him.  Yes, the case was plain to Hendon--he must lose no more time
in Southwark, but move at once through Kent, toward Monk's Holm,
searching the wood and inquiring as he went.  Let us return to the
vanished little King now.

The ruffian whom the waiter at the inn on the bridge saw 'about to
join' the youth and the King did not exactly join them, but fell
in close behind them and followed their steps.  He said nothing.
His left arm was in a sling, and he wore a large green patch over
his left eye; he limped slightly, and used an oaken staff as a
support.  The youth led the King a crooked course through
Southwark, and by-and-by struck into the high road beyond.  The
King was irritated, now, and said he would stop here--it was
Hendon's place to come to him, not his to go to Hendon.  He would
not endure such insolence; he would stop where he was.  The youth
said--

"Thou'lt tarry here, and thy friend lying wounded in the wood
yonder?  So be it, then."

The King's manner changed at once.  He cried out--

"Wounded?  And who hath dared to do it?  But that is apart; lead
on, lead on!  Faster, sirrah!  Art shod with lead?  Wounded, is
he?  Now though the doer of it be a duke's son he shall rue it!"

It was some distance to the wood, but the space was speedily
traversed.  The youth looked about him, discovered a bough
sticking in the ground, with a small bit of rag tied to it, then
led the way into the forest, watching for similar boughs and
finding them at intervals; they were evidently guides to the point
he was aiming at.  By-and-by an open place was reached, where were
the charred remains of a farm-house, and near them a barn which
was falling to ruin and decay.  There was no sign of life
anywhere, and utter silence prevailed.  The youth entered the
barn, the King following eagerly upon his heels.  No one there!
The King shot a surprised and suspicious glance at the youth, and
asked--

"Where is he?"

A mocking laugh was his answer.  The King was in a rage in a
moment; he seized a billet of wood and was in the act of charging
upon the youth when another mocking laugh fell upon his ear.  It
was from the lame ruffian who had been following at a distance.
The King turned and said angrily--

"Who art thou?  What is thy business here?"

"Leave thy foolery," said the man, "and quiet thyself.  My
disguise is none so good that thou canst pretend thou knowest not
thy father through it."

"Thou art not my father.  I know thee not.  I am the King.  If
thou hast hid my servant, find him for me, or thou shalt sup
sorrow for what thou hast done."

John Canty replied, in a stern and measured voice--

"It is plain thou art mad, and I am loath to punish thee;  but if
thou provoke me, I must.  Thy prating doth no harm here, where
there are no ears that need to mind thy follies; yet it is well to
practise thy tongue to wary speech, that it may do no hurt when
our quarters change.  I have done a murder, and may not tarry at
home--neither shalt thou, seeing I need thy service.  My name is
changed, for wise reasons; it is Hobbs--John Hobbs; thine is Jack-
-charge thy memory accordingly.  Now, then, speak.  Where is thy
mother?  Where are thy sisters?  They came not to the place
appointed--knowest thou whither they went?"

The King answered sullenly--

"Trouble me not with these riddles.  My mother is dead; my sisters
are in the palace."

The youth near by burst into a derisive laugh, and the King would
have assaulted him, but Canty--or Hobbs, as he now called himself-
-prevented him, and said--

"Peace, Hugo, vex him not; his mind is astray, and thy ways fret
him.  Sit thee down, Jack, and quiet thyself; thou shalt have a
morsel to eat, anon."

Hobbs and Hugo fell to talking together, in low voices, and the
King removed himself as far as he could from their disagreeable
company.  He withdrew into the twilight of the farther end of the
barn, where he found the earthen floor bedded a foot deep with
straw.  He lay down here, drew straw over himself in lieu of
blankets, and was soon absorbed in thinking.  He had many griefs,
but the minor ones were swept almost into forgetfulness by the
supreme one, the loss of his father.  To the rest of the world the
name of Henry VIII. brought a shiver, and suggested an ogre whose
nostrils breathed destruction and whose hand dealt scourgings and
death; but to this boy the name brought only sensations of
pleasure; the figure it invoked wore a countenance that was all
gentleness and affection.  He called to mind a long succession of
loving passages between his father and himself, and dwelt fondly
upon them, his unstinted tears attesting how deep and real was the
grief that possessed his heart.  As the afternoon wasted away, the
lad, wearied with his troubles, sank gradually into a tranquil and
healing slumber.

After a considerable time--he could not tell how long--his senses
struggled to a half-consciousness, and as he lay with closed eyes
vaguely wondering where he was and what had been happening, he
noted a murmurous sound, the sullen beating of rain upon the roof.
A snug sense of comfort stole over him, which was rudely broken,
the next moment, by a chorus of piping cackles and coarse
laughter.  It startled him disagreeably, and he unmuffled his head
to see whence this interruption proceeded.  A grim and unsightly
picture met his eye.  A bright fire was burning in the middle of
the floor, at the other end of the barn; and around it, and lit
weirdly up by the red glare, lolled and sprawled the motliest
company of tattered gutter-scum and ruffians, of both sexes, he
had ever read or dreamed of.  There were huge stalwart men, brown
with exposure, long-haired, and clothed in fantastic rags; there
were middle-sized youths, of truculent countenance, and similarly
clad; there were blind mendicants, with patched or bandaged eyes;
crippled ones, with wooden legs and crutches; diseased ones, with
running sores peeping from ineffectual wrappings; there was a
villain-looking pedlar with his pack; a knife-grinder, a tinker,
and a barber-surgeon, with the implements of their trades; some of
the females were hardly-grown girls, some were at prime, some were
old and wrinkled hags, and all were loud, brazen, foul-mouthed;
and all soiled and slatternly; there were three sore-faced babies;
there were a couple of starveling curs, with strings about their
necks, whose office was to lead the blind.

The night was come, the gang had just finished feasting, an orgy
was beginning; the can of liquor was passing from mouth to mouth.
A general cry broke forth--

"A song! a song from the Bat and Dick and Dot-and-go-One!"

One of the blind men got up, and made ready by casting aside the
patches that sheltered his excellent eyes, and the pathetic
placard which recited the cause of his calamity.  Dot-and-go-One
disencumbered himself of his timber leg and took his place, upon
sound and healthy limbs, beside his fellow-rascal; then they
roared out a rollicking ditty, and were reinforced by the whole
crew, at the end of each stanza, in a rousing chorus.  By the time
the last stanza was reached, the half-drunken enthusiasm had risen
to such a pitch, that everybody joined in and sang it clear
through from the beginning, producing a volume of villainous sound
that made the rafters quake.  These were the inspiring words:--

     'Bien Darkman's then, Bouse Mort and Ken,
      The bien Coves bings awast,
      On Chates to trine by Rome Coves dine
      For his long lib at last.
      Bing'd out bien Morts and toure, and toure,
      Bing out of the Rome vile bine,
      And toure the Cove that cloy'd your duds,
      Upon the Chates to trine.'
                           (From 'The English Rogue.' London,
1665.)

Conversation followed; not in the thieves' dialect of the song,
for that was only used in talk when unfriendly ears might be
listening.  In the course of it, it appeared that 'John Hobbs' was
not altogether a new recruit, but had trained in the gang at some
former time.  His later history was called for, and when he said
he had 'accidentally' killed a man, considerable satisfaction was
expressed; when he added that the man was a priest, he was roundly
applauded, and had to take a drink with everybody.  Old
acquaintances welcomed him joyously, and new ones were proud to
shake him by the hand.  He was asked why he had 'tarried away so
many months.'  He answered--

"London is better than the country, and safer, these late years,
the laws be so bitter and so diligently enforced.  An' I had not
had that accident, I had stayed there.  I had resolved to stay,
and never more venture country-wards--but the accident has ended
that."

He inquired how many persons the gang numbered now.  The
'ruffler,' or chief, answered--

"Five and twenty sturdy budges, bulks, files, clapperdogeons and
maunders, counting the dells and doxies and other morts. {7}  Most
are here, the rest are wandering eastward, along the winter lay.
We follow at dawn."

"I do not see the Wen among the honest folk about me.  Where may
he be?"

"Poor lad, his diet is brimstone, now, and over hot for a delicate
taste.  He was killed in a brawl, somewhere about midsummer."

"I sorrow to hear that; the Wen was a capable man, and brave."

"That was he, truly.  Black Bess, his dell, is of us yet, but
absent on the eastward tramp; a fine lass, of nice ways and
orderly conduct, none ever seeing her drunk above four days in the
seven."

"She was ever strict--I remember it well--a goodly wench and
worthy all commendation.  Her mother was more free and less
particular; a troublesome and ugly-tempered beldame, but furnished
with a wit above the common."

"We lost her through it.  Her gift of palmistry and other sorts of
fortune-telling begot for her at last a witch's name and fame.
The law roasted her to death at a slow fire.  It did touch me to a
sort of tenderness to see the gallant way she met her lot--cursing
and reviling all the crowd that gaped and gazed around her, whilst
the flames licked upward toward her face and catched her thin
locks and crackled about her old gray head--cursing them! why an'
thou should'st live a thousand years thoud'st never hear so
masterful a cursing.  Alack, her art died with her.  There be base
and weakling imitations left, but no true blasphemy."

The Ruffler sighed; the listeners sighed in sympathy; a general
depression fell upon the company for a moment, for even hardened
outcasts like these are not wholly dead to sentiment, but are able
to feel a fleeting sense of loss and affliction at wide intervals
and under peculiarly favouring circumstances--as in cases like to
this, for instance, when genius and culture depart and leave no
heir.  However, a deep drink all round soon restored the spirits
of the mourners.

"Have any others of our friends fared hardly?" asked Hobbs.

"Some--yes.  Particularly new comers--such as small husbandmen
turned shiftless and hungry upon the world because their farms
were taken from them to be changed to sheep ranges.  They begged,
and were whipped at the cart's tail, naked from the girdle up,
till the blood ran; then set in the stocks to be pelted; they
begged again, were whipped again, and deprived of an ear; they
begged a third time--poor devils, what else could they do?--and
were branded on the cheek with a red-hot iron, then sold for
slaves; they ran away, were hunted down, and hanged.  'Tis a brief
tale, and quickly told.  Others of us have fared less hardly.
Stand forth, Yokel, Burns, and Hodge--show your adornments!"

These stood up and stripped away some of their rags, exposing
their backs, criss-crossed with ropy old welts left by the lash;
one turned up his hair and showed the place where a left ear had
once been; another showed a brand upon his shoulder--the letter V-
-and a mutilated ear; the third said--

"I am Yokel, once a farmer and prosperous, with loving wife and
kids--now am I somewhat different in estate and calling; and the
wife and kids are gone; mayhap they are in heaven, mayhap in--in
the other place--but the kindly God be thanked, they bide no more
in ENGLAND!  My good old blameless mother strove to earn bread by
nursing the sick; one of these died, the doctors knew not how, so
my mother was burnt for a witch, whilst my babes looked on and
wailed.  English law!--up, all, with your cups!--now all together
and with a cheer!--drink to the merciful English law that
delivered HER from the English hell!  Thank you, mates, one and
all.  I begged, from house to house--I and the wife--bearing with
us the hungry kids--but it was crime to be hungry in England--so
they stripped us and lashed us through three towns.  Drink ye all
again to the merciful English law!--for its lash drank deep of my
Mary's blood and its blessed deliverance came quick.  She lies
there, in the potter's field, safe from all harms.  And the kids--
well, whilst the law lashed me from town to town, they starved.
Drink, lads--only a drop--a drop to the poor kids, that never did
any creature harm.  I begged again--begged, for a crust, and got
the stocks and lost an ear--see, here bides the stump; I begged
again, and here is the stump of the other to keep me minded of it.
And still I begged again, and was sold for a slave--here on my
cheek under this stain, if I washed it off, ye might see the red S
the branding-iron left there!  A SLAVE!  Do you understand that
word?  An English SLAVE!--that is he that stands before ye.  I
have run from my master, and when I am found--the heavy curse of
heaven fall on the law of the land that hath commanded it!--I
shall hang!" {1}

A ringing voice came through the murky air--

"Thou shalt NOT!--and this day the end of that law is come!"

All turned, and saw the fantastic figure of the little King
approaching hurriedly; as it emerged into the light and was
clearly revealed, a general explosion of inquiries broke out--

"Who is it?  WHAT is it?  Who art thou, manikin?"

The boy stood unconfused in the midst of all those surprised and
questioning eyes, and answered with princely dignity--

"I am Edward, King of England."

A wild burst of laughter followed, partly of derision and partly
of delight in the excellence of the joke.  The King was stung.  He
said sharply--

"Ye mannerless vagrants, is this your recognition of the royal
boon I have promised?"

He said more, with angry voice and excited gesture, but it was
lost in a whirlwind of laughter and mocking exclamations.  'John
Hobbs' made several attempts to make himself heard above the din,
and at last succeeded--saying--

"Mates, he is my son, a dreamer, a fool, and stark mad--mind him
not--he thinketh he IS the King."

"I AM the King," said Edward, turning toward him, "as thou shalt
know to thy cost, in good time.  Thou hast confessed a murder--
thou shalt swing for it."

"THOU'LT betray me?--THOU?  An' I get my hands upon thee--"

"Tut-tut!" said the burley Ruffler, interposing in time to save
the King, and emphasising this service by knocking Hobbs down with
his fist, "hast respect for neither Kings NOR Rufflers?  An' thou
insult my presence so again, I'll hang thee up myself."  Then he
said to his Majesty, "Thou must make no threats against thy mates,
lad; and thou must guard thy tongue from saying evil of them
elsewhere.  BE King, if it please thy mad humour, but be not
harmful in it.  Sink the title thou hast uttered--'tis treason; we
be bad men in some few trifling ways, but none among us is so base
as to be traitor to his King; we be loving and loyal hearts, in
that regard.  Note if I speak truth.  Now--all together:  'Long
live Edward, King of England!'"

"LONG LIVE EDWARD, KING OF ENGLAND!"

The response came with such a thundergust from the motley crew
that the crazy building vibrated to the sound.  The little King's
face lighted with pleasure for an instant, and he slightly
inclined his head, and said with grave simplicity--

"I thank you, my good people."

This unexpected result threw the company into convulsions of
merriment.  When something like quiet was presently come again,
the Ruffler said, firmly, but with an accent of good nature--

"Drop it, boy, 'tis not wise, nor well.  Humour thy fancy, if thou
must, but choose some other title."

A tinker shrieked out a suggestion--

"Foo-foo the First, King of the Mooncalves!"

The title 'took,' at once, every throat responded, and a roaring
shout went up, of--

"Long live Foo-foo the First, King of the Mooncalves!" followed by
hootings, cat-calls, and peals of laughter.

"Hale him forth, and crown him!"

"Robe him!"

"Sceptre him!"

"Throne him!"

These and twenty other cries broke out at once! and almost before
the poor little victim could draw a breath he was crowned with a
tin basin, robed in a tattered blanket, throned upon a barrel, and
sceptred with the tinker's soldering-iron.  Then all flung
themselves upon their knees about him and sent up a chorus of
ironical wailings, and mocking supplications, whilst they swabbed
their eyes with their soiled and ragged sleeves and aprons--

"Be gracious to us, O sweet King!"

"Trample not upon thy beseeching worms, O noble Majesty!"

"Pity thy slaves, and comfort them with a royal kick!"

"Cheer us and warm us with thy gracious rays, O flaming sun of
sovereignty!"

"Sanctify the ground with the touch of thy foot, that we may eat
the dirt and be ennobled!"

"Deign to spit upon us, O Sire, that our children's children may
tell of thy princely condescension, and be proud and happy for
ever!"

But the humorous tinker made the 'hit' of the evening and carried
off the honours.  Kneeling, he pretended to kiss the King's foot,
and was indignantly spurned; whereupon he went about begging for a
rag to paste over the place upon his face which had been touched
by the foot, saying it must be preserved from contact with the
vulgar air, and that he should make his fortune by going on the
highway and exposing it to view at the rate of a hundred shillings
a sight.  He made himself so killingly funny that he was the envy
and admiration of the whole mangy rabble.

Tears of shame and indignation stood in the little monarch's eyes;
and the thought in his heart was, "Had I offered them a deep wrong
they could not be more cruel--yet have I proffered nought but to
do them a kindness--and it is thus they use me for it!"



Chapter XVIII. The Prince with the tramps.

The troop of vagabonds turned out at early dawn, and set forward
on their march.  There was a lowering sky overhead, sloppy ground
under foot, and a winter chill in the air.  All gaiety was gone
from the company; some were sullen and silent, some were irritable
and petulant, none were gentle-humoured, all were thirsty.

The Ruffler put 'Jack' in Hugo's charge, with some brief
instructions, and commanded John Canty to keep away from him and
let him alone; he also warned Hugo not to be too rough with the
lad.

After a while the weather grew milder, and the clouds lifted
somewhat.  The troop ceased to shiver, and their spirits began to
improve.  They grew more and more cheerful, and finally began to
chaff each other and insult passengers along the highway.  This
showed that they were awaking to an appreciation of life and its
joys once more.  The dread in which their sort was held was
apparent in the fact that everybody gave them the road, and took
their ribald insolences meekly, without venturing to talk back.
They snatched linen from the hedges, occasionally in full view of
the owners, who made no protest, but only seemed grateful that
they did not take the hedges, too.

By-and-by they invaded a small farmhouse and made themselves at
home while the trembling farmer and his people swept the larder
clean to furnish a breakfast for them.  They chucked the housewife
and her daughters under the chin whilst receiving the food from
their hands, and made coarse jests about them, accompanied with
insulting epithets and bursts of horse-laughter.  They threw bones
and vegetables at the farmer and his sons, kept them dodging all
the time, and applauded uproariously when a good hit was made.
They ended by buttering the head of one of the daughters who
resented some of their familiarities.  When they took their leave
they threatened to come back and burn the house over the heads of
the family if any report of their doings got to the ears of the
authorities.

About noon, after a long and weary tramp, the gang came to a halt
behind a hedge on the outskirts of a considerable village.  An
hour was allowed for rest, then the crew scattered themselves
abroad to enter the village at different points to ply their
various trades--'Jack' was sent with Hugo.  They wandered hither
and thither for some time, Hugo watching for opportunities to do a
stroke of business, but finding none--so he finally said--

"I see nought to steal; it is a paltry place.  Wherefore we will
beg."

"WE, forsooth!  Follow thy trade--it befits thee.  But _I_ will
not beg."

"Thou'lt not beg!" exclaimed Hugo, eyeing the King with surprise.
"Prithee, since when hast thou reformed?"

"What dost thou mean?"

"Mean?  Hast thou not begged the streets of London all thy life?"

"I?  Thou idiot!"

"Spare thy compliments--thy stock will last the longer.  Thy
father says thou hast begged all thy days.  Mayhap he lied.
Peradventure you will even make so bold as to SAY he lied,"
scoffed Hugo.

"Him YOU call my father?  Yes, he lied."

"Come, play not thy merry game of madman so far, mate; use it for
thy amusement, not thy hurt.  An' I tell him this, he will scorch
thee finely for it."

"Save thyself the trouble.  I will tell him."

"I like thy spirit, I do in truth; but I do not admire thy
judgment.  Bone-rackings and bastings be plenty enow in this life,
without going out of one's way to invite them.  But a truce to
these matters; _I_ believe your father.  I doubt not he can lie; I
doubt not he DOTH lie, upon occasion, for the best of us do that;
but there is no occasion here.  A wise man does not waste so good
a commodity as lying for nought.  But come; sith it is thy humour
to give over begging, wherewithal shall we busy ourselves?  With
robbing kitchens?"

The King said, impatiently--

"Have done with this folly--you weary me!"

Hugo replied, with temper--

"Now harkee, mate; you will not beg, you will not rob; so be it.
But I will tell you what you WILL do.  You will play decoy whilst
_I_ beg.  Refuse, an' you think you may venture!"

The King was about to reply contemptuously, when Hugo said,
interrupting--

"Peace!  Here comes one with a kindly face.  Now will I fall down
in a fit.  When the stranger runs to me, set you up a wail, and
fall upon your knees, seeming to weep; then cry out as all the
devils of misery were in your belly, and say, 'Oh, sir, it is my
poor afflicted brother, and we be friendless; o' God's name cast
through your merciful eyes one pitiful look upon a sick, forsaken,
and most miserable wretch; bestow one little penny out of thy
riches upon one smitten of God and ready to perish!'--and mind
you, keep you ON wailing, and abate not till we bilk him of his
penny, else shall you rue it."

Then immediately Hugo began to moan, and groan, and roll his eyes,
and reel and totter about; and when the stranger was close at
hand, down he sprawled before him, with a shriek, and began to
writhe and wallow in the dirt, in seeming agony.

"O, dear, O dear!" cried the benevolent stranger, "O poor soul,
poor soul, how he doth suffer!  There--let me help thee up."

"O noble sir, forbear, and God love you for a princely gentleman--
but it giveth me cruel pain to touch me when I am taken so.  My
brother there will tell your worship how I am racked with anguish
when these fits be upon me.  A penny, dear sir, a penny, to buy a
little food; then leave me to my sorrows."

"A penny! thou shalt have three, thou hapless creature"--and he
fumbled in his pocket with nervous haste and got them out.
"There, poor lad, take them and most welcome.  Now come hither, my
boy, and help me carry thy stricken brother to yon house, where--"

"I am not his brother," said the King, interrupting.

"What! not his brother?"

"Oh, hear him!" groaned Hugo, then privately ground his teeth.
"He denies his own brother--and he with one foot in the grave!"

"Boy, thou art indeed hard of heart, if this is thy brother.  For
shame!--and he scarce able to move hand or foot.  If he is not thy
brother, who is he, then?"

"A beggar and a thief!  He has got your money and has picked your
pocket likewise.  An' thou would'st do a healing miracle, lay thy
staff over his shoulders and trust Providence for the rest."

But Hugo did not tarry for the miracle.  In a moment he was up and
off like the wind, the gentleman following after and raising the
hue and cry lustily as he went.  The King, breathing deep
gratitude to Heaven for his own release, fled in the opposite
direction, and did not slacken his pace until he was out of harm's
reach.  He took the first road that offered, and soon put the
village behind him.  He hurried along, as briskly as he could,
during several hours, keeping a nervous watch over his shoulder
for pursuit; but his fears left him at last, and a grateful sense
of security took their place.  He recognised, now, that he was
hungry, and also very tired.  So he halted at a farmhouse; but
when he was about to speak, he was cut short and driven rudely
away.  His clothes were against him.

He wandered on, wounded and indignant, and was resolved to put
himself in the way of like treatment no more.  But hunger is
pride's master; so, as the evening drew near, he made an attempt
at another farmhouse; but here he fared worse than before; for he
was called hard names and was promised arrest as a vagrant except
he moved on promptly.

The night came on, chilly and overcast; and still the footsore
monarch laboured slowly on.  He was obliged to keep moving, for
every time he sat down to rest he was soon penetrated to the bone
with the cold.  All his sensations and experiences, as he moved
through the solemn gloom and the empty vastness of the night, were
new and strange to him.  At intervals he heard voices approach,
pass by, and fade into silence; and as he saw nothing more of the
bodies they belonged to than a sort of formless drifting blur,
there was something spectral and uncanny about it all that made
him shudder.  Occasionally he caught the twinkle of a light--
always far away, apparently--almost in another world; if he heard
the tinkle of a sheep's bell, it was vague, distant, indistinct;
the muffled lowing of the herds floated to him on the night wind
in vanishing cadences, a mournful sound; now and then came the
complaining howl of a dog over viewless expanses of field and
forest; all sounds were remote; they made the little King feel
that all life and activity were far removed from him, and that he
stood solitary, companionless, in the centre of a measureless
solitude.

He stumbled along, through the gruesome fascinations of this new
experience, startled occasionally by the soft rustling of the dry
leaves overhead, so like human whispers they seemed to sound; and
by-and-by he came suddenly upon the freckled light of a tin
lantern near at hand.  He stepped back into the shadows and
waited.  The lantern stood by the open door of a barn.  The King
waited some time--there was no sound, and nobody stirring.  He got
so cold, standing still, and the hospitable barn looked so
enticing, that at last he resolved to risk everything and enter.
He started swiftly and stealthily, and just as he was crossing the
threshold he heard voices behind him.  He darted behind a cask,
within the barn, and stooped down.  Two farm-labourers came in,
bringing the lantern with them, and fell to work, talking
meanwhile.  Whilst they moved about with the light, the King made
good use of his eyes and took the bearings of what seemed to be a
good-sized stall at the further end of the place, purposing to
grope his way to it when he should be left to himself.  He also
noted the position of a pile of horse blankets, midway of the
route, with the intent to levy upon them for the service of the
crown of England for one night.

By-and-by the men finished and went away, fastening the door
behind them and taking the lantern with them.  The shivering King
made for the blankets, with as good speed as the darkness would
allow; gathered them up, and then groped his way safely to the
stall.  Of two of the blankets he made a bed, then covered himself
with the remaining two.  He was a glad monarch, now, though the
blankets were old and thin, and not quite warm enough; and besides
gave out a pungent horsey odour that was almost suffocatingly
powerful.

Although the King was hungry and chilly, he was also so tired and
so drowsy that these latter influences soon began to get the
advantage of the former, and he presently dozed off into a state
of semi-consciousness.  Then, just as he was on the point of
losing himself wholly, he distinctly felt something touch him!  He
was broad awake in a moment, and gasping for breath.  The cold
horror of that mysterious touch in the dark almost made his heart
stand still.  He lay motionless, and listened, scarcely breathing.
But nothing stirred, and there was no sound.  He continued to
listen, and wait, during what seemed a long time, but still
nothing stirred, and there was no sound.  So he began to drop into
a drowse once more, at last; and all at once he felt that
mysterious touch again!  It was a grisly thing, this light touch
from this noiseless and invisible presence; it made the boy sick
with ghostly fears.  What should he do?  That was the question;
but he did not know how to answer it.  Should he leave these
reasonably comfortable quarters and fly from this inscrutable
horror?  But fly whither?  He could not get out of the barn; and
the idea of scurrying blindly hither and thither in the dark,
within the captivity of the four walls, with this phantom gliding
after him, and visiting him with that soft hideous touch upon
cheek or shoulder at every turn, was intolerable.  But to stay
where he was, and endure this living death all night--was that
better?  No.  What, then, was there left to do?  Ah, there was but
one course; he knew it well--he must put out his hand and find
that thing!

It was easy to think this; but it was hard to brace himself up to
try it.  Three times he stretched his hand a little way out into
the dark, gingerly; and snatched it suddenly back, with a gasp--
not because it had encountered anything, but because he had felt
so sure it was just GOING to.  But the fourth time, he groped a
little further, and his hand lightly swept against something soft
and warm.  This petrified him, nearly, with fright; his mind was
in such a state that he could imagine the thing to be nothing else
than a corpse, newly dead and still warm.  He thought he would
rather die than touch it again.  But he thought this false thought
because he did not know the immortal strength of human curiosity.
In no long time his hand was tremblingly groping again--against
his judgment, and without his consent--but groping persistently
on, just the same.  It encountered a bunch of long hair; he
shuddered, but followed up the hair and found what seemed to be a
warm rope; followed up the rope and found an innocent calf!--for
the rope was not a rope at all, but the calf's tail.

The King was cordially ashamed of himself for having gotten all
that fright and misery out of so paltry a matter as a slumbering
calf; but he need not have felt so about it, for it was not the
calf that frightened him, but a dreadful non-existent something
which the calf stood for; and any other boy, in those old
superstitious times, would have acted and suffered just as he had
done.

The King was not only delighted to find that the creature was only
a calf, but delighted to have the calf's company; for he had been
feeling so lonesome and friendless that the company and
comradeship of even this humble animal were welcome.  And he had
been so buffeted, so rudely entreated by his own kind, that it was
a real comfort to him to feel that he was at last in the society
of a fellow-creature that had at least a soft heart and a gentle
spirit, whatever loftier attributes might be lacking.  So he
resolved to waive rank and make friends with the calf.

While stroking its sleek warm back--for it lay near him and within
easy reach--it occurred to him that this calf might be utilised in
more ways than one.  Whereupon he re-arranged his bed, spreading
it down close to the calf; then he cuddled himself up to the
calf's back, drew the covers up over himself and his friend, and
in a minute or two was as warm and comfortable as he had ever been
in the downy couches of the regal palace of Westminster.

Pleasant thoughts came at once; life took on a cheerfuller
seeming.  He was free of the bonds of servitude and crime, free of
the companionship of base and brutal outlaws; he was warm; he was
sheltered; in a word, he was happy.  The night wind was rising; it
swept by in fitful gusts that made the old barn quake and rattle,
then its forces died down at intervals, and went moaning and
wailing around corners and projections--but it was all music to
the King, now that he was snug and comfortable:  let it blow and
rage, let it batter and bang, let it moan and wail, he minded it
not, he only enjoyed it.  He merely snuggled the closer to his
friend, in a luxury of warm contentment, and drifted blissfully
out of consciousness into a deep and dreamless sleep that was full
of serenity and peace.  The distant dogs howled, the melancholy
kine complained, and the winds went on raging, whilst furious
sheets of rain drove along the roof; but the Majesty of England
slept on, undisturbed, and the calf did the same, it being a
simple creature, and not easily troubled by storms or embarrassed
by sleeping with a king.



Chapter XIX. The Prince with the peasants.

When the King awoke in the early morning, he found that a wet but
thoughtful rat had crept into the place during the night and made
a cosy bed for itself in his bosom.  Being disturbed now, it
scampered away.  The boy smiled, and said, "Poor fool, why so
fearful?  I am as forlorn as thou.  'Twould be a sham in me to
hurt the helpless, who am myself so helpless.  Moreover, I owe you
thanks for a good omen; for when a king has fallen so low that the
very rats do make a bed of him, it surely meaneth that his
fortunes be upon the turn, since it is plain he can no lower go."

He got up and stepped out of the stall, and just then he heard the
sound of children's voices.  The barn door opened and a couple of
little girls came in.  As soon as they saw him their talking and
laughing ceased, and they stopped and stood still, gazing at him
with strong curiosity; they presently began to whisper together,
then they approached nearer, and stopped again to gaze and
whisper.  By-and-by they gathered courage and began to discuss him
aloud.  One said--

"He hath a comely face."

The other added--

"And pretty hair."

"But is ill clothed enow."

"And how starved he looketh."

They came still nearer, sidling shyly around and about him,
examining him minutely from all points, as if he were some strange
new kind of animal, but warily and watchfully the while, as if
they half feared he might be a sort of animal that would bite,
upon occasion.  Finally they halted before him, holding each
other's hands for protection, and took a good satisfying stare
with their innocent eyes; then one of them plucked up all her
courage and inquired with honest directness--

"Who art thou, boy?"

"I am the King," was the grave answer.

The children gave a little start, and their eyes spread themselves
wide open and remained so during a speechless half minute.  Then
curiosity broke the silence--

"The KING?  What King?"

"The King of England."

The children looked at each other--then at him--then at each other
again--wonderingly, perplexedly; then one said--

"Didst hear him, Margery?--he said he is the King.  Can that be
true?"

"How can it be else but true, Prissy?  Would he say a lie?  For
look you, Prissy, an' it were not true, it WOULD be a lie.  It
surely would be.  Now think on't.  For all things that be not
true, be lies--thou canst make nought else out of it."

It was a good tight argument, without a leak in it anywhere; and
it left Prissy's half-doubts not a leg to stand on.  She
considered a moment, then put the King upon his honour with the
simple remark--

"If thou art truly the King, then I believe thee."

"I am truly the King."

This settled the matter.  His Majesty's royalty was accepted
without further question or discussion, and the two little girls
began at once to inquire into how he came to be where he was, and
how he came to be so unroyally clad, and whither he was bound, and
all about his affairs.  It was a mighty relief to him to pour out
his troubles where they would not be scoffed at or doubted; so he
told his tale with feeling, forgetting even his hunger for the
time; and it was received with the deepest and tenderest sympathy
by the gentle little maids.  But when he got down to his latest
experiences and they learned how long he had been without food,
they cut him short and hurried him away to the farmhouse to find a
breakfast for him.

The King was cheerful and happy now, and said to himself, "When I
am come to mine own again, I will always honour little children,
remembering how that these trusted me and believed in me in my
time of trouble; whilst they that were older, and thought
themselves wiser, mocked at me and held me for a liar."

The children's mother received the King kindly, and was full of
pity; for his forlorn condition and apparently crazed intellect
touched her womanly heart.  She was a widow, and rather poor;
consequently she had seen trouble enough to enable her to feel for
the unfortunate.  She imagined that the demented boy had wandered
away from his friends or keepers; so she tried to find out whence
he had come, in order that she might take measures to return him;
but all her references to neighbouring towns and villages, and all
her inquiries in the same line went for nothing--the boy's face,
and his answers, too, showed that the things she was talking of
were not familiar to him.  He spoke earnestly and simply about
court matters, and broke down, more than once, when speaking of
the late King 'his father'; but whenever the conversation changed
to baser topics, he lost interest and became silent.

The woman was mightily puzzled; but she did not give up.  As she
proceeded with her cooking, she set herself to contriving devices
to surprise the boy into betraying his real secret.  She talked
about cattle--he showed no concern; then about sheep--the same
result:  so her guess that he had been a shepherd boy was an
error; she talked about mills; and about weavers, tinkers, smiths,
trades and tradesmen of all sorts; and about Bedlam, and jails,
and charitable retreats:  but no matter, she was baffled at all
points.  Not altogether, either; for she argued that she had
narrowed the thing down to domestic service.  Yes, she was sure
she was on the right track, now; he must have been a house
servant.  So she led up to that.  But the result was discouraging.
The subject of sweeping appeared to weary him; fire-building
failed to stir him; scrubbing and scouring awoke no enthusiasm.
The goodwife touched, with a perishing hope, and rather as a
matter of form, upon the subject of cooking.  To her surprise, and
her vast delight, the King's face lighted at once!  Ah, she had
hunted him down at last, she thought; and she was right proud,
too, of the devious shrewdness and tact which had accomplished it.

Her tired tongue got a chance to rest, now; for the King's,
inspired by gnawing hunger and the fragrant smells that came from
the sputtering pots and pans, turned itself loose and delivered
itself up to such an eloquent dissertation upon certain toothsome
dishes, that within three minutes the woman said to herself, "Of a
truth I was right--he hath holpen in a kitchen!"  Then he
broadened his bill of fare, and discussed it with such
appreciation and animation, that the goodwife said to herself,
"Good lack! how can he know so many dishes, and so fine ones
withal?  For these belong only upon the tables of the rich and
great.  Ah, now I see! ragged outcast as he is, he must have
served in the palace before his reason went astray; yes, he must
have helped in the very kitchen of the King himself!  I will test
him."

Full of eagerness to prove her sagacity, she told the King to mind
the cooking a moment--hinting that he might manufacture and add a
dish or two, if he chose; then she went out of the room and gave
her children a sign to follow after.  The King muttered--

"Another English king had a commission like to this, in a bygone
time--it is nothing against my dignity to undertake an office
which the great Alfred stooped to assume.  But I will try to
better serve my trust than he; for he let the cakes burn."

The intent was good, but the performance was not answerable to it,
for this King, like the other one, soon fell into deep thinkings
concerning his vast affairs, and the same calamity resulted--the
cookery got burned.  The woman returned in time to save the
breakfast from entire destruction; and she promptly brought the
King out of his dreams with a brisk and cordial tongue-lashing.
Then, seeing how troubled he was over his violated trust, she
softened at once, and was all goodness and gentleness toward him.

The boy made a hearty and satisfying meal, and was greatly
refreshed and gladdened by it.  It was a meal which was
distinguished by this curious feature, that rank was waived on
both sides; yet neither recipient of the favour was aware that it
had been extended.  The goodwife had intended to feed this young
tramp with broken victuals in a corner, like any other tramp or
like a dog; but she was so remorseful for the scolding she had
given him, that she did what she could to atone for it by allowing
him to sit at the family table and eat with his betters, on
ostensible terms of equality with them; and the King, on his side,
was so remorseful for having broken his trust, after the family
had been so kind to him, that he forced himself to atone for it by
humbling himself to the family level, instead of requiring the
woman and her children to stand and wait upon him, while he
occupied their table in the solitary state due to his birth and
dignity.  It does us all good to unbend sometimes.  This good
woman was made happy all the day long by the applauses which she
got out of herself for her magnanimous condescension to a tramp;
and the King was just as self-complacent over his gracious
humility toward a humble peasant woman.

When breakfast was over, the housewife told the King to wash up
the dishes.  This command was a staggerer, for a moment, and the
King came near rebelling; but then he said to himself, "Alfred the
Great watched the cakes; doubtless he would have washed the dishes
too--therefore will I essay it."

He made a sufficiently poor job of it; and to his surprise too,
for the cleaning of wooden spoons and trenchers had seemed an easy
thing to do.  It was a tedious and troublesome piece of work, but
he finished it at last.  He was becoming impatient to get away on
his journey now; however, he was not to lose this thrifty dame's
society so easily.  She furnished him some little odds and ends of
employment, which he got through with after a fair fashion and
with some credit.  Then she set him and the little girls to paring
some winter apples; but he was so awkward at this service that she
retired him from it and gave him a butcher knife to grind.
Afterwards she kept him carding wool until he began to think he
had laid the good King Alfred about far enough in the shade for
the present in the matter of showy menial heroisms that would read
picturesquely in story-books and histories, and so he was half-
minded to resign.  And when, just after the noonday dinner, the
goodwife gave him a basket of kittens to drown, he did resign.  At
least he was just going to resign--for he felt that he must draw
the line somewhere, and it seemed to him that to draw it at
kitten-drowning was about the right thing--when there was an
interruption.  The interruption was John Canty--with a peddler's
pack on his back--and Hugo.

The King discovered these rascals approaching the front gate
before they had had a chance to see him; so he said nothing about
drawing the line, but took up his basket of kittens and stepped
quietly out the back way, without a word.  He left the creatures
in an out-house, and hurried on, into a narrow lane at the rear.



Chapter XX. The Prince and the hermit.

The high hedge hid him from the house, now; and so, under the
impulse of a deadly fright, he let out all his forces and sped
toward a wood in the distance.  He never looked back until he had
almost gained the shelter of the forest; then he turned and
descried two figures in the distance.  That was sufficient; he did
not wait to scan them critically, but hurried on, and never abated
his pace till he was far within the twilight depths of the wood.
Then he stopped; being persuaded that he was now tolerably safe.
He listened intently, but the stillness was profound and solemn--
awful, even, and depressing to the spirits.  At wide intervals his
straining ear did detect sounds, but they were so remote, and
hollow, and mysterious, that they seemed not to be real sounds,
but only the moaning and complaining ghosts of departed ones.  So
the sounds were yet more dreary than the silence which they
interrupted.

It was his purpose, in the beginning, to stay where he was the
rest of the day; but a chill soon invaded his perspiring body, and
he was at last obliged to resume movement in order to get warm.
He struck straight through the forest, hoping to pierce to a road
presently, but he was disappointed in this.  He travelled on and
on; but the farther he went, the denser the wood became,
apparently.  The gloom began to thicken, by-and-by, and the King
realised that the night was coming on.  It made him shudder to
think of spending it in such an uncanny place; so he tried to
hurry faster, but he only made the less speed, for he could not
now see well enough to choose his steps judiciously; consequently
he kept tripping over roots and tangling himself in vines and
briers.

And how glad he was when at last he caught the glimmer of a light!
He approached it warily, stopping often to look about him and
listen.  It came from an unglazed window-opening in a shabby
little hut.  He heard a voice, now, and felt a disposition to run
and hide; but he changed his mind at once, for this voice was
praying, evidently.  He glided to the one window of the hut,
raised himself on tiptoe, and stole a glance within.  The room was
small; its floor was the natural earth, beaten hard by use; in a
corner was a bed of rushes and a ragged blanket or two; near it
was a pail, a cup, a basin, and two or three pots and pans; there
was a short bench and a three-legged stool; on the hearth the
remains of a faggot fire were smouldering; before a shrine, which
was lighted by a single candle, knelt an aged man, and on an old
wooden box at his side lay an open book and a human skull.  The
man was of large, bony frame; his hair and whiskers were very long
and snowy white; he was clothed in a robe of sheepskins which
reached from his neck to his heels.

"A holy hermit!" said the King to himself; "now am I indeed
fortunate."

The hermit rose from his knees; the King knocked.  A deep voice
responded--

"Enter!--but leave sin behind, for the ground whereon thou shalt
stand is holy!"

The King entered, and paused.  The hermit turned a pair of
gleaming, unrestful eyes upon him, and said--

"Who art thou?"

"I am the King," came the answer, with placid simplicity.

"Welcome, King!" cried the hermit, with enthusiasm.  Then,
bustling about with feverish activity, and constantly saying,
"Welcome, welcome," he arranged his bench, seated the King on it,
by the hearth, threw some faggots on the fire, and finally fell to
pacing the floor with a nervous stride.

"Welcome!  Many have sought sanctuary here, but they were not
worthy, and were turned away.  But a King who casts his crown
away, and despises the vain splendours of his office, and clothes
his body in rags, to devote his life to holiness and the
mortification of the flesh--he is worthy, he is welcome!--here
shall he abide all his days till death come."  The King hastened
to interrupt and explain, but the hermit paid no attention to him-
-did not even hear him, apparently, but went right on with his
talk, with a raised voice and a growing energy.  "And thou shalt
be at peace here.  None shall find out thy refuge to disquiet thee
with supplications to return to that empty and foolish life which
God hath moved thee to abandon.  Thou shalt pray here; thou shalt
study the Book; thou shalt meditate upon the follies and delusions
of this world, and upon the sublimities of the world to come; thou
shalt feed upon crusts and herbs, and scourge thy body with whips,
daily, to the purifying of thy soul.  Thou shalt wear a hair shirt
next thy skin; thou shalt drink water only; and thou shalt be at
peace; yes, wholly at peace; for whoso comes to seek thee shall go
his way again, baffled; he shall not find thee, he shall not
molest thee."

The old man, still pacing back and forth, ceased to speak aloud,
and began to mutter.  The King seized this opportunity to state
his case; and he did it with an eloquence inspired by uneasiness
and apprehension.  But the hermit went on muttering, and gave no
heed.  And still muttering, he approached the King and said
impressively--

"'Sh!  I will tell you a secret!"  He bent down to impart it, but
checked himself, and assumed a listening attitude.  After a moment
or two he went on tiptoe to the window-opening, put his head out,
and peered around in the gloaming, then came tiptoeing back again,
put his face close down to the King's, and whispered--

"I am an archangel!"

The King started violently, and said to himself, "Would God I were
with the outlaws again; for lo, now am I the prisoner of a
madman!"  His apprehensions were heightened, and they showed
plainly in his face.  In a low excited voice the hermit continued-
-

"I see you feel my atmosphere!  There's awe in your face!  None
may be in this atmosphere and not be thus affected; for it is the
very atmosphere of heaven.  I go thither and return, in the
twinkling of an eye.  I was made an archangel on this very spot,
it is five years ago, by angels sent from heaven to confer that
awful dignity.  Their presence filled this place with an
intolerable brightness.  And they knelt to me, King! yes, they
knelt to me! for I was greater than they.  I have walked in the
courts of heaven, and held speech with the patriarchs.  Touch my
hand--be not afraid--touch it.  There--now thou hast touched a
hand which has been clasped by Abraham and Isaac and Jacob!  For I
have walked in the golden courts; I have seen the Deity face to
face!"  He paused, to give this speech effect; then his face
suddenly changed, and he started to his feet again saying, with
angry energy, "Yes, I am an archangel; A MERE ARCHANGEL!--I that
might have been p