ope!  It is verily true.  I was told it from
heaven in a dream, twenty years ago; ah, yes, I was to be pope!--
and I SHOULD have been pope, for Heaven had said it--but the King
dissolved my religious house, and I, poor obscure unfriended monk,
was cast homeless upon the world, robbed of my mighty destiny!"
Here he began to mumble again, and beat his forehead in futile
rage, with his fist; now and then articulating a venomous curse,
and now and then a pathetic "Wherefore I am nought but an
archangel--I that should have been pope!"

So he went on, for an hour, whilst the poor little King sat and
suffered.  Then all at once the old man's frenzy departed, and he
became all gentleness.  His voice softened, he came down out of
his clouds, and fell to prattling along so simply and so humanly,
that he soon won the King's heart completely.  The old devotee
moved the boy nearer to the fire and made him comfortable;
doctored his small bruises and abrasions with a deft and tender
hand; and then set about preparing and cooking a supper--chatting
pleasantly all the time, and occasionally stroking the lad's cheek
or patting his head, in such a gently caressing way that in a
little while all the fear and repulsion inspired by the archangel
were changed to reverence and affection for the man.

This happy state of things continued while the two ate the supper;
then, after a prayer before the shrine, the hermit put the boy to
bed, in a small adjoining room, tucking him in as snugly and
lovingly as a mother might; and so, with a parting caress, left
him and sat down by the fire, and began to poke the brands about
in an absent and aimless way.  Presently he paused; then tapped
his forehead several times with his fingers, as if trying to
recall some thought which had escaped from his mind.  Apparently
he was unsuccessful.  Now he started quickly up, and entered his
guest's room, and said--

"Thou art King?"

"Yes," was the response, drowsily uttered.

"What King?"

"Of England."

"Of England?  Then Henry is gone!"

"Alack, it is so.  I am his son."

A black frown settled down upon the hermit's face, and he clenched
his bony hands with a vindictive energy.  He stood a few moments,
breathing fast and swallowing repeatedly, then said in a husky
voice--

"Dost know it was he that turned us out into the world houseless
and homeless?"

There was no response.  The old man bent down and scanned the
boy's reposeful face and listened to his placid breathing.  "He
sleeps--sleeps soundly;" and the frown vanished away and gave
place to an expression of evil satisfaction.  A smile flitted
across the dreaming boy's features.  The hermit muttered, "So--his
heart is happy;" and he turned away.  He went stealthily about the
place, seeking here and there for something; now and then halting
to listen, now and then jerking his head around and casting a
quick glance toward the bed; and always muttering, always mumbling
to himself.  At last he found what he seemed to want--a rusty old
butcher knife and a whetstone.  Then he crept to his place by the
fire, sat himself down, and began to whet the knife softly on the
stone, still muttering, mumbling, ejaculating.  The winds sighed
around the lonely place, the mysterious voices of the night
floated by out of the distances.  The shining eyes of venturesome
mice and rats peered out at the old man from cracks and coverts,
but he went on with his work, rapt, absorbed, and noted none of
these things.

At long intervals he drew his thumb along the edge of his knife,
and nodded his head with satisfaction.  "It grows sharper," he
said; "yes, it grows sharper."

He took no note of the flight of time, but worked tranquilly on,
entertaining himself with his thoughts, which broke out
occasionally in articulate speech--

"His father wrought us evil, he destroyed us--and is gone down
into the eternal fires!  Yes, down into the eternal fires!  He
escaped us--but it was God's will, yes it was God's will, we must
not repine.  But he hath not escaped the fires!  No, he hath not
escaped the fires, the consuming, unpitying, remorseless fires--
and THEY are everlasting!"

And so he wrought, and still wrought--mumbling, chuckling a low
rasping chuckle at times--and at times breaking again into words--

"It was his father that did it all.  I am but an archangel; but
for him I should be pope!"

The King stirred.  The hermit sprang noiselessly to the bedside,
and went down upon his knees, bending over the prostrate form with
his knife uplifted.  The boy stirred again; his eyes came open for
an instant, but there was no speculation in them, they saw
nothing; the next moment his tranquil breathing showed that his
sleep was sound once more.

The hermit watched and listened, for a time, keeping his position
and scarcely breathing; then he slowly lowered his arms, and
presently crept away, saying,--

"It is long past midnight; it is not best that he should cry out,
lest by accident someone be passing."

He glided about his hovel, gathering a rag here, a thong there,
and another one yonder; then he returned, and by careful and
gentle handling he managed to tie the King's ankles together
without waking him.  Next he essayed to tie the wrists; he made
several attempts to cross them, but the boy always drew one hand
or the other away, just as the cord was ready to be applied; but
at last, when the archangel was almost ready to despair, the boy
crossed his hands himself, and the next moment they were bound.
Now a bandage was passed under the sleeper's chin and brought up
over his head and tied fast--and so softly, so gradually, and so
deftly were the knots drawn together and compacted, that the boy
slept peacefully through it all without stirring.



Chapter XXI. Hendon to the rescue.

The old man glided away, stooping, stealthy, cat-like, and brought
the low bench.  He seated himself upon it, half his body in the
dim and flickering light, and the other half in shadow; and so,
with his craving eyes bent upon the slumbering boy, he kept his
patient vigil there, heedless of the drift of time, and softly
whetted his knife, and mumbled and chuckled; and in aspect and
attitude he resembled nothing so much as a grizzly, monstrous
spider, gloating over some hapless insect that lay bound and
helpless in his web.

After a long while, the old man, who was still gazing,--yet not
seeing, his mind having settled into a dreamy abstraction,--
observed, on a sudden, that the boy's eyes were open! wide open
and staring!--staring up in frozen horror at the knife.  The smile
of a gratified devil crept over the old man's face, and he said,
without changing his attitude or his occupation--

"Son of Henry the Eighth, hast thou prayed?"

The boy struggled helplessly in his bonds, and at the same time
forced a smothered sound through his closed jaws, which the hermit
chose to interpret as an affirmative answer to his question.

"Then pray again.  Pray the prayer for the dying!"

A shudder shook the boy's frame, and his face blenched.  Then he
struggled again to free himself--turning and twisting himself this
way and that; tugging frantically, fiercely, desperately--but
uselessly--to burst his fetters; and all the while the old ogre
smiled down upon him, and nodded his head, and placidly whetted
his knife; mumbling, from time to time, "The moments are precious,
they are few and precious--pray the prayer for the dying!"

The boy uttered a despairing groan, and ceased from his struggles,
panting.  The tears came, then, and trickled, one after the other,
down his face; but this piteous sight wrought no softening effect
upon the savage old man.

The dawn was coming now; the hermit observed it, and spoke up
sharply, with a touch of nervous apprehension in his voice--

"I may not indulge this ecstasy longer!  The night is already
gone.  It seems but a moment--only a moment; would it had endured
a year!  Seed of the Church's spoiler, close thy perishing eyes,
an' thou fearest to look upon--"

The rest was lost in inarticulate mutterings.  The old man sank
upon his knees, his knife in his hand, and bent himself over the
moaning boy.

Hark!  There was a sound of voices near the cabin--the knife
dropped from the hermit's hand; he cast a sheepskin over the boy
and started up, trembling.  The sounds increased, and presently
the voices became rough and angry; then came blows, and cries for
help; then a clatter of swift footsteps, retreating.  Immediately
came a succession of thundering knocks upon the cabin door,
followed by--

"Hullo-o-o!  Open!  And despatch, in the name of all the devils!"

Oh, this was the blessedest sound that had ever made music in the
King's ears; for it was Miles Hendon's voice!

The hermit, grinding his teeth in impotent rage, moved swiftly out
of the bedchamber, closing the door behind him; and straightway
the King heard a talk, to this effect, proceeding from the
'chapel':--

"Homage and greeting, reverend sir!  Where is the boy--MY boy?"

"What boy, friend?"

"What boy!  Lie me no lies, sir priest, play me no deceptions!--I
am not in the humour for it.  Near to this place I caught the
scoundrels who I judged did steal him from me, and I made them
confess; they said he was at large again, and they had tracked him
to your door.  They showed me his very footprints.  Now palter no
more; for look you, holy sir, an' thou produce him not--Where is
the boy?"

"O good sir, peradventure you mean the ragged regal vagrant that
tarried here the night.  If such as you take an interest in such
as he, know, then, that I have sent him of an errand.  He will be
back anon."

"How soon?  How soon?  Come, waste not the time--cannot I overtake
him?  How soon will he be back?"

"Thou need'st not stir; he will return quickly."

"So be it, then.  I will try to wait.  But stop!--YOU sent him of
an errand?--you!  Verily this is a lie--he would not go.  He would
pull thy old beard, an' thou didst offer him such an insolence.
Thou hast lied, friend; thou hast surely lied!  He would not go
for thee, nor for any man."

"For any MAN--no; haply not.  But I am not a man."

"WHAT!  Now o' God's name what art thou, then?"

"It is a secret--mark thou reveal it not.  I am an archangel!"

There was a tremendous ejaculation from Miles Hendon--not
altogether unprofane--followed by--

"This doth well and truly account for his complaisance!  Right
well I knew he would budge nor hand nor foot in the menial service
of any mortal; but, lord, even a king must obey when an archangel
gives the word o' command!  Let me--'sh!  What noise was that?"

All this while the little King had been yonder, alternately
quaking with terror and trembling with hope; and all the while,
too, he had thrown all the strength he could into his anguished
moanings, constantly expecting them to reach Hendon's ear, but
always realising, with bitterness, that they failed, or at least
made no impression.  So this last remark of his servant came as
comes a reviving breath from fresh fields to the dying; and he
exerted himself once more, and with all his energy, just as the
hermit was saying--

"Noise?  I heard only the wind."

"Mayhap it was.  Yes, doubtless that was it.  I have been hearing
it faintly all the--there it is again!  It is not the wind!  What
an odd sound!  Come, we will hunt it out!"

Now the King's joy was nearly insupportable.  His tired lungs did
their utmost--and hopefully, too--but the sealed jaws and the
muffling sheepskin sadly crippled the effort.  Then the poor
fellow's heart sank, to hear the hermit say--

"Ah, it came from without--I think from the copse yonder.  Come, I
will lead the way."

The King heard the two pass out, talking; heard their footsteps
die quickly away--then he was alone with a boding, brooding, awful
silence.

It seemed an age till he heard the steps and voices approaching
again--and this time he heard an added sound,--the trampling of
hoofs, apparently.  Then he heard Hendon say--

"I will not wait longer.  I CANNOT wait longer.  He has lost his
way in this thick wood.  Which direction took he?  Quick--point it
out to me."

"He--but wait; I will go with thee."

"Good--good!  Why, truly thou art better than thy looks.  Marry I
do not think there's not another archangel with so right a heart
as thine.  Wilt ride?  Wilt take the wee donkey that's for my boy,
or wilt thou fork thy holy legs over this ill-conditioned slave of
a mule that I have provided for myself?--and had been cheated in
too, had he cost but the indifferent sum of a month's usury on a
brass farthing let to a tinker out of work."

"No--ride thy mule, and lead thine ass; I am surer on mine own
feet, and will walk."

"Then prithee mind the little beast for me while I take my life in
my hands and make what success I may toward mounting the big one."

Then followed a confusion of kicks, cuffs, tramplings and
plungings, accompanied by a thunderous intermingling of volleyed
curses, and finally a bitter apostrophe to the mule, which must
have broken its spirit, for hostilities seemed to cease from that
moment.

With unutterable misery the fettered little King heard the voices
and footsteps fade away and die out.  All hope forsook him, now,
for the moment, and a dull despair settled down upon his heart.
"My only friend is deceived and got rid of," he said; "the hermit
will return and--"  He finished with a gasp; and at once fell to
struggling so frantically with his bonds again, that he shook off
the smothering sheepskin.

And now he heard the door open!  The sound chilled him to the
marrow--already he seemed to feel the knife at his throat.  Horror
made him close his eyes; horror made him open them again--and
before him stood John Canty and Hugo!

He would have said "Thank God!" if his jaws had been free.

A moment or two later his limbs were at liberty, and his captors,
each gripping him by an arm, were hurrying him with all speed
through the forest.



Chapter XXII. A victim of treachery.

Once more 'King Foo-foo the First' was roving with the tramps and
outlaws, a butt for their coarse jests and dull-witted railleries,
and sometimes the victim of small spitefulness at the hands of
Canty and Hugo when the Ruffler's back was turned.  None but Canty
and Hugo really disliked him.  Some of the others liked him, and
all admired his pluck and spirit.  During two or three days, Hugo,
in whose ward and charge the King was, did what he covertly could
to make the boy uncomfortable; and at night, during the customary
orgies, he amused the company by putting small indignities upon
him--always as if by accident.  Twice he stepped upon the King's
toes--accidentally--and the King, as became his royalty, was
contemptuously unconscious of it and indifferent to it; but the
third time Hugo entertained himself in that way, the King felled
him to the ground with a cudgel, to the prodigious delight of the
tribe.  Hugo, consumed with anger and shame, sprang up, seized a
cudgel, and came at his small adversary in a fury.  Instantly a
ring was formed around the gladiators, and the betting and
cheering began.  But poor Hugo stood no chance whatever.  His
frantic and lubberly 'prentice-work found but a poor market for
itself when pitted against an arm which had been trained by the
first masters of Europe in single-stick, quarter-staff, and every
art and trick of swordsmanship.  The little King stood, alert but
at graceful ease, and caught and turned aside the thick rain of
blows with a facility and precision which set the motley on-
lookers wild with admiration; and every now and then, when his
practised eye detected an opening, and a lightning-swift rap upon
Hugo's head followed as a result, the storm of cheers and laughter
that swept the place was something wonderful to hear.  At the end
of fifteen minutes, Hugo, all battered, bruised, and the target
for a pitiless bombardment of ridicule, slunk from the field; and
the unscathed hero of the fight was seized and borne aloft upon
the shoulders of the joyous rabble to the place of honour beside
the Ruffler, where with vast ceremony he was crowned King of the
Game-Cocks; his meaner title being at the same time solemnly
cancelled and annulled, and a decree of banishment from the gang
pronounced against any who should thenceforth utter it.

All attempts to make the King serviceable to the troop had failed.
He had stubbornly refused to act; moreover, he was always trying
to escape.  He had been thrust into an unwatched kitchen, the
first day of his return; he not only came forth empty-handed, but
tried to rouse the housemates.  He was sent out with a tinker to
help him at his work; he would not work; moreover, he threatened
the tinker with his own soldering-iron; and finally both Hugo and
the tinker found their hands full with the mere matter of keeping
his from getting away.  He delivered the thunders of his royalty
upon the heads of all who hampered his liberties or tried to force
him to service.  He was sent out, in Hugo's charge, in company
with a slatternly woman and a diseased baby, to beg; but the
result was not encouraging--he declined to plead for the
mendicants, or be a party to their cause in any way.

Thus several days went by; and the miseries of this tramping life,
and the weariness and sordidness and meanness and vulgarity of it,
became gradually and steadily so intolerable to the captive that
he began at last to feel that his release from the hermit's knife
must prove only a temporary respite from death, at best.

But at night, in his dreams, these things were forgotten, and he
was on his throne, and master again.  This, of course, intensified
the sufferings of the awakening--so the mortifications of each
succeeding morning of the few that passed between his return to
bondage and the combat with Hugo, grew bitterer and bitterer, and
harder and harder to bear.

The morning after that combat, Hugo got up with a heart filled
with vengeful purposes against the King.  He had two plans, in
particular.  One was to inflict upon the lad what would be, to his
proud spirit and 'imagined' royalty, a peculiar humiliation; and
if he failed to accomplish this, his other plan was to put a crime
of some kind upon the King, and then betray him into the
implacable clutches of the law.

In pursuance of the first plan, he purposed to put a 'clime' upon
the King's leg; rightly judging that that would mortify him to the
last and perfect degree; and as soon as the clime should operate,
he meant to get Canty's help, and FORCE the King to expose his leg
in the highway and beg for alms.  'Clime' was the cant term for a
sore, artificially created.  To make a clime, the operator made a
paste or poultice of unslaked lime, soap, and the rust of old
iron, and spread it upon a piece of leather, which was then bound
tightly upon the leg.  This would presently fret off the skin, and
make the flesh raw and angry-looking; blood was then rubbed upon
the limb, which, being fully dried, took on a dark and repulsive
colour.  Then a bandage of soiled rags was put on in a cleverly
careless way which would allow the hideous ulcer to be seen, and
move the compassion of the passer-by. {8}

Hugo got the help of the tinker whom the King had cowed with the
soldering-iron; they took the boy out on a tinkering tramp, and as
soon as they were out of sight of the camp they threw him down and
the tinker held him while Hugo bound the poultice tight and fast
upon his leg.

The King raged and stormed, and promised to hang the two the
moment the sceptre was in his hand again; but they kept a firm
grip upon him and enjoyed his impotent struggling and jeered at
his threats.  This continued until the poultice began to bite; and
in no long time its work would have been perfected, if there had
been no interruption.  But there was; for about this time the
'slave' who had made the speech denouncing England's laws,
appeared on the scene, and put an end to the enterprise, and
stripped off the poultice and bandage.

The King wanted to borrow his deliverer's cudgel and warm the
jackets of the two rascals on the spot; but the man said no, it
would bring trouble--leave the matter till night; the whole tribe
being together, then, the outside world would not venture to
interfere or interrupt.  He marched the party back to camp and
reported the affair to the Ruffler, who listened, pondered, and
then decided that the King should not be again detailed to beg,
since it was plain he was worthy of something higher and better--
wherefore, on the spot he promoted him from the mendicant rank and
appointed him to steal!

Hugo was overjoyed.  He had already tried to make the King steal,
and failed; but there would be no more trouble of that sort, now,
for of course the King would not dream of defying a distinct
command delivered directly from head-quarters.  So he planned a
raid for that very afternoon, purposing to get the King in the
law's grip in the course of it; and to do it, too, with such
ingenious strategy, that it should seem to be accidental and
unintentional; for the King of the Game-Cocks was popular now, and
the gang might not deal over-gently with an unpopular member who
played so serious a treachery upon him as the delivering him over
to the common enemy, the law.

Very well.  All in good time Hugo strolled off to a neighbouring
village with his prey; and the two drifted slowly up and down one
street after another, the one watching sharply for a sure chance
to achieve his evil purpose, and the other watching as sharply for
a chance to dart away and get free of his infamous captivity for
ever.

Both threw away some tolerably fair-looking opportunities; for
both, in their secret hearts, were resolved to make absolutely
sure work this time, and neither meant to allow his fevered
desires to seduce him into any venture that had much uncertainty
about it.

Hugo's chance came first.  For at last a woman approached who
carried a fat package of some sort in a basket.  Hugo's eyes
sparkled with sinful pleasure as he said to himself, "Breath o' my
life, an' I can but put THAT upon him, 'tis good-den and God keep
thee, King of the Game-Cocks!"  He waited and watched--outwardly
patient, but inwardly consuming with excitement--till the woman
had passed by, and the time was ripe; then said, in a low voice--

"Tarry here till I come again," and darted stealthily after the
prey.

The King's heart was filled with joy--he could make his escape,
now, if Hugo's quest only carried him far enough away.

But he was to have no such luck.  Hugo crept behind the woman,
snatched the package, and came running back, wrapping it in an old
piece of blanket which he carried on his arm.  The hue and cry was
raised in a moment, by the woman, who knew her loss by the
lightening of her burden, although she had not seen the pilfering
done.  Hugo thrust the bundle into the King's hands without
halting, saying--

"Now speed ye after me with the rest, and cry 'Stop thief!' but
mind ye lead them astray!"

The next moment Hugo turned a corner and darted down a crooked
alley--and in another moment or two he lounged into view again,
looking innocent and indifferent, and took up a position behind a
post to watch results.

The insulted King threw the bundle on the ground; and the blanket
fell away from it just as the woman arrived, with an augmenting
crowd at her heels; she seized the King's wrist with one hand,
snatched up her bundle with the other, and began to pour out a
tirade of abuse upon the boy while he struggled, without success,
to free himself from her grip.

Hugo had seen enough--his enemy was captured and the law would get
him, now--so he slipped away, jubilant and chuckling, and wended
campwards, framing a judicious version of the matter to give to
the Ruffler's crew as he strode along.

The King continued to struggle in the woman's strong grasp, and
now and then cried out in vexation--

"Unhand me, thou foolish creature; it was not I that bereaved thee
of thy paltry goods."

The crowd closed around, threatening the King and calling him
names; a brawny blacksmith in leather apron, and sleeves rolled to
his elbows, made a reach for him, saying he would trounce him
well, for a lesson; but just then a long sword flashed in the air
and fell with convincing force upon the man's arm, flat side down,
the fantastic owner of it remarking pleasantly, at the same time--

"Marry, good souls, let us proceed gently, not with ill blood and
uncharitable words.  This is matter for the law's consideration,
not private and unofficial handling.  Loose thy hold from the boy,
goodwife."

The blacksmith averaged the stalwart soldier with a glance, then
went muttering away, rubbing his arm; the woman released the boy's
wrist reluctantly; the crowd eyed the stranger unlovingly, but
prudently closed their mouths.  The King sprang to his deliverer's
side, with flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes, exclaiming--

"Thou hast lagged sorely, but thou comest in good season, now, Sir
Miles; carve me this rabble to rags!"



Chapter XXIII. The Prince a prisoner.

Hendon forced back a smile, and bent down and whispered in the
King's ear--

"Softly, softly, my prince, wag thy tongue warily--nay, suffer it
not to wag at all.  Trust in me--all shall go well in the end."
Then he added to himself:  "SIR Miles!  Bless me, I had totally
forgot I was a knight!  Lord, how marvellous a thing it is, the
grip his memory doth take upon his quaint and crazy fancies! . . .
An empty and foolish title is mine, and yet it is something to
have deserved it; for I think it is more honour to be held worthy
to be a spectre-knight in his Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows, than
to be held base enough to be an earl in some of the REAL kingdoms
of this world."

The crowd fell apart to admit a constable, who approached and was
about to lay his hand upon the King's shoulder, when Hendon said--

"Gently, good friend, withhold your hand--he shall go peaceably; I
am responsible for that.  Lead on, we will follow."

The officer led, with the woman and her bundle; Miles and the King
followed after, with the crowd at their heels.  The King was
inclined to rebel; but Hendon said to him in a low voice--

"Reflect, Sire--your laws are the wholesome breath of your own
royalty; shall their source resist them, yet require the branches
to respect them?  Apparently one of these laws has been broken;
when the King is on his throne again, can it ever grieve him to
remember that when he was seemingly a private person he loyally
sank the king in the citizen and submitted to its authority?"

"Thou art right; say no more; thou shalt see that whatsoever the
King of England requires a subject to suffer, under the law, he
will himself suffer while he holdeth the station of a subject."

When the woman was called upon to testify before the justice of
the peace, she swore that the small prisoner at the bar was the
person who had committed the theft; there was none able to show
the contrary, so the King stood convicted.  The bundle was now
unrolled, and when the contents proved to be a plump little
dressed pig, the judge looked troubled, whilst Hendon turned pale,
and his body was thrilled with an electric shiver of dismay; but
the King remained unmoved, protected by his ignorance.  The judge
meditated, during an ominous pause, then turned to the woman, with
the question--

"What dost thou hold this property to be worth?"

The woman courtesied and replied--

"Three shillings and eightpence, your worship--I could not abate a
penny and set forth the value honestly."

The justice glanced around uncomfortably upon the crowd, then
nodded to the constable, and said--

"Clear the court and close the doors."

It was done.  None remained but the two officials, the accused,
the accuser, and Miles Hendon.  This latter was rigid and
colourless, and on his forehead big drops of cold sweat gathered,
broke and blended together, and trickled down his face.  The judge
turned to the woman again, and said, in a compassionate voice--

"'Tis a poor ignorant lad, and mayhap was driven hard by hunger,
for these be grievous times for the unfortunate; mark you, he hath
not an evil face--but when hunger driveth--Good woman! dost know
that when one steals a thing above the value of thirteenpence
ha'penny the law saith he shall HANG for it?"

The little King started, wide-eyed with consternation, but
controlled himself and held his peace; but not so the woman.  She
sprang to her feet, shaking with fright, and cried out--

"Oh, good lack, what have I done!  God-a-mercy, I would not hang
the poor thing for the whole world!  Ah, save me from this, your
worship--what shall I do, what CAN I do?"

The justice maintained his judicial composure, and simply said--

"Doubtless it is allowable to revise the value, since it is not
yet writ upon the record."

"Then in God's name call the pig eightpence, and heaven bless the
day that freed my conscience of this awesome thing!"

Miles Hendon forgot all decorum in his delight; and surprised the
King and wounded his dignity, by throwing his arms around him and
hugging him.  The woman made her grateful adieux and started away
with her pig; and when the constable opened the door for her, he
followed her out into the narrow hall.  The justice proceeded to
write in his record book.  Hendon, always alert, thought he would
like to know why the officer followed the woman out; so he slipped
softly into the dusky hall and listened.  He heard a conversation
to this effect--

"It is a fat pig, and promises good eating; I will buy it of thee;
here is the eightpence."

"Eightpence, indeed!  Thou'lt do no such thing.  It cost me three
shillings and eightpence, good honest coin of the last reign, that
old Harry that's just dead ne'er touched or tampered with.  A fig
for thy eightpence!"

"Stands the wind in that quarter?  Thou wast under oath, and so
swore falsely when thou saidst the value was but eightpence.  Come
straightway back with me before his worship, and answer for the
crime!--and then the lad will hang."

"There, there, dear heart, say no more, I am content.  Give me the
eightpence, and hold thy peace about the matter."

The woman went off crying:  Hendon slipped back into the court
room, and the constable presently followed, after hiding his prize
in some convenient place.  The justice wrote a while longer, then
read the King a wise and kindly lecture, and sentenced him to a
short imprisonment in the common jail, to be followed by a public
flogging.  The astounded King opened his mouth, and was probably
going to order the good judge to be beheaded on the spot; but he
caught a warning sign from Hendon, and succeeded in closing his
mouth again before he lost anything out of it.  Hendon took him by
the hand, now, made reverence to the justice, and the two departed
in the wake of the constable toward the jail.  The moment the
street was reached, the inflamed monarch halted, snatched away his
hand, and exclaimed--

"Idiot, dost imagine I will enter a common jail ALIVE?"

Hendon bent down and said, somewhat sharply--

"WILL you trust in me?  Peace! and forbear to worsen our chances
with dangerous speech.  What God wills, will happen; thou canst
not hurry it, thou canst not alter it; therefore wait, and be
patient--'twill be time enow to rail or rejoice when what is to
happen has happened." {1}



Chapter XXIV. The escape.

The short winter day was nearly ended.  The streets were deserted,
save for a few random stragglers, and these hurried straight
along, with the intent look of people who were only anxious to
accomplish their errands as quickly as possible, and then snugly
house themselves from the rising wind and the gathering twilight.
They looked neither to the right nor to the left; they paid no
attention to our party, they did not even seem to see them.
Edward the Sixth wondered if the spectacle of a king on his way to
jail had ever encountered such marvellous indifference before.
By-and-by the constable arrived at a deserted market-square, and
proceeded to cross it.  When he had reached the middle of it,
Hendon laid his hand upon his arm, and said in a low voice--

"Bide a moment, good sir, there is none in hearing, and I would
say a word to thee."

"My duty forbids it, sir; prithee hinder me not, the night comes
on."

"Stay, nevertheless, for the matter concerns thee nearly.  Turn
thy back a moment and seem not to see:  LET THIS POOR LAD ESCAPE."

"This to me, sir!  I arrest thee in--"

"Nay, be not too hasty.  See thou be careful and commit no foolish
error"--then he shut his voice down to a whisper, and said in the
man's ear--"the pig thou hast purchased for eightpence may cost
thee thy neck, man!"

The poor constable, taken by surprise, was speechless, at first,
then found his tongue and fell to blustering and threatening; but
Hendon was tranquil, and waited with patience till his breath was
spent; then said--

"I have a liking to thee, friend, and would not willingly see thee
come to harm.  Observe, I heard it all--every word.  I will prove
it to thee."  Then he repeated the conversation which the officer
and the woman had had together in the hall, word for word, and
ended with--

"There--have I set it forth correctly?  Should not I be able to
set it forth correctly before the judge, if occasion required?"

The man was dumb with fear and distress, for a moment; then he
rallied, and said with forced lightness--

"'Tis making a mighty matter, indeed, out of a jest; I but plagued
the woman for mine amusement."

"Kept you the woman's pig for amusement?"

The man answered sharply--

"Nought else, good sir--I tell thee 'twas but a jest."

"I do begin to believe thee," said Hendon, with a perplexing
mixture of mockery and half-conviction in his tone; "but tarry
thou here a moment whilst I run and ask his worship--for nathless,
he being a man experienced in law, in jests, in--"

He was moving away, still talking; the constable hesitated,
fidgeted, spat out an oath or two, then cried out--

"Hold, hold, good sir--prithee wait a little--the judge!  Why,
man, he hath no more sympathy with a jest than hath a dead
corpse!--come, and we will speak further.  Ods body!  I seem to be
in evil case--and all for an innocent and thoughtless pleasantry.
I am a man of family; and my wife and little ones--  List to
reason, good your worship:  what wouldst thou of me?"

"Only that thou be blind and dumb and paralytic whilst one may
count a hundred thousand--counting slowly," said Hendon, with the
expression of a man who asks but a reasonable favour, and that a
very little one.

"It is my destruction!" said the constable despairingly.  "Ah, be
reasonable, good sir; only look at this matter, on all its sides,
and see how mere a jest it is--how manifestly and how plainly it
is so.  And even if one granted it were not a jest, it is a fault
so small that e'en the grimmest penalty it could call forth would
be but a rebuke and warning from the judge's lips."

Hendon replied with a solemnity which chilled the air about him--

"This jest of thine hath a name, in law,--wot you what it is?"

"I knew it not!  Peradventure I have been unwise.  I never dreamed
it had a name--ah, sweet heaven, I thought it was original."

"Yes, it hath a name.  In the law this crime is called Non compos
mentis lex talionis sic transit gloria mundi."

"Ah, my God!"

"And the penalty is death!"

"God be merciful to me a sinner!"

"By advantage taken of one in fault, in dire peril, and at thy
mercy, thou hast seized goods worth above thirteenpence ha'penny,
paying but a trifle for the same; and this, in the eye of the law,
is constructive barratry, misprision of treason, malfeasance in
office, ad hominem expurgatis in statu quo--and the penalty is
death by the halter, without ransom, commutation, or benefit of
clergy."

"Bear me up, bear me up, sweet sir, my legs do fail me!  Be thou
merciful--spare me this doom, and I will turn my back and see
nought that shall happen."

"Good! now thou'rt wise and reasonable.  And thou'lt restore the
pig?"

"I will, I will indeed--nor ever touch another, though heaven send
it and an archangel fetch it.  Go--I am blind for thy sake--I see
nothing.  I will say thou didst break in and wrest the prisoner
from my hands by force.  It is but a crazy, ancient door--I will
batter it down myself betwixt midnight and the morning."

"Do it, good soul, no harm will come of it; the judge hath a
loving charity for this poor lad, and will shed no tears and break
no jailer's bones for his escape."



Chapter XXV. Hendon Hall.

As soon as Hendon and the King were out of sight of the constable,
his Majesty was instructed to hurry to a certain place outside the
town, and wait there, whilst Hendon should go to the inn and
settle his account.  Half an hour later the two friends were
blithely jogging eastward on Hendon's sorry steeds.  The King was
warm and comfortable, now, for he had cast his rags and clothed
himself in the second-hand suit which Hendon had bought on London
Bridge.

Hendon wished to guard against over-fatiguing the boy; he judged
that hard journeys, irregular meals, and illiberal measures of
sleep would be bad for his crazed mind; whilst rest, regularity,
and moderate exercise would be pretty sure to hasten its cure; he
longed to see the stricken intellect made well again and its
diseased visions driven out of the tormented little head;
therefore he resolved to move by easy stages toward the home
whence he had so long been banished, instead of obeying the
impulse of his impatience and hurrying along night and day.

When he and the King had journeyed about ten miles, they reached a
considerable village, and halted there for the night, at a good
inn.  The former relations were resumed; Hendon stood behind the
King's chair, while he dined, and waited upon him; undressed him
when he was ready for bed; then took the floor for his own
quarters, and slept athwart the door, rolled up in a blanket.

The next day, and the day after, they jogged lazily along talking
over the adventures they had met since their separation, and
mightily enjoying each other's narratives.  Hendon detailed all
his wide wanderings in search of the King, and described how the
archangel had led him a fool's journey all over the forest, and
taken him back to the hut, finally, when he found he could not get
rid of him.  Then--he said--the old man went into the bedchamber
and came staggering back looking broken-hearted, and saying he had
expected to find that the boy had returned and laid down in there
to rest, but it was not so.  Hendon had waited at the hut all day;
hope of the King's return died out, then, and he departed upon the
quest again.

"And old Sanctum Sanctorum WAS truly sorry your highness came not
back," said Hendon; "I saw it in his face."

"Marry I will never doubt THAT!" said the King--and then told his
own story; after which, Hendon was sorry he had not destroyed the
archangel.

During the last day of the trip, Hendon's spirits were soaring.
His tongue ran constantly.  He talked about his old father, and
his brother Arthur, and told of many things which illustrated
their high and generous characters; he went into loving frenzies
over his Edith, and was so glad-hearted that he was even able to
say some gentle and brotherly things about Hugh.  He dwelt a deal
on the coming meeting at Hendon Hall; what a surprise it would be
to everybody, and what an outburst of thanksgiving and delight
there would be.

It was a fair region, dotted with cottages and orchards, and the
road led through broad pasture lands whose receding expanses,
marked with gentle elevations and depressions, suggested the
swelling and subsiding undulations of the sea.  In the afternoon
the returning prodigal made constant deflections from his course
to see if by ascending some hillock he might not pierce the
distance and catch a glimpse of his home.  At last he was
successful, and cried out excitedly--

"There is the village, my Prince, and there is the Hall close by!
You may see the towers from here; and that wood there--that is my
father's park.  Ah, NOW thou'lt know what state and grandeur be!
A house with seventy rooms--think of that!--and seven and twenty
servants!  A brave lodging for such as we, is it not so?  Come,
let us speed--my impatience will not brook further delay."

All possible hurry was made; still, it was after three o'clock
before the village was reached.  The travellers scampered through
it, Hendon's tongue going all the time.  "Here is the church--
covered with the same ivy--none gone, none added."  "Yonder is the
inn, the old Red Lion,--and yonder is the market-place."  "Here is
the Maypole, and here the pump--nothing is altered; nothing but
the people, at any rate; ten years make a change in people; some
of these I seem to know, but none know me."  So his chat ran on.
The end of the village was soon reached; then the travellers
struck into a crooked, narrow road, walled in with tall hedges,
and hurried briskly along it for half a mile, then passed into a
vast flower garden through an imposing gateway, whose huge stone
pillars bore sculptured armorial devices.  A noble mansion was
before them.

"Welcome to Hendon Hall, my King!" exclaimed Miles.  "Ah, 'tis a
great day!  My father and my brother, and the Lady Edith will be
so mad with joy that they will have eyes and tongue for none but
me in the first transports of the meeting, and so thou'lt seem but
coldly welcomed--but mind it not; 'twill soon seem otherwise; for
when I say thou art my ward, and tell them how costly is my love
for thee, thou'lt see them take thee to their breasts for Miles
Hendon's sake, and make their house and hearts thy home for ever
after!"

The next moment Hendon sprang to the ground before the great door,
helped the King down, then took him by the hand and rushed within.
A few steps brought him to a spacious apartment; he entered,
seated the King with more hurry than ceremony, then ran toward a
young man who sat at a writing-table in front of a generous fire
of logs.

"Embrace me, Hugh," he cried, "and say thou'rt glad I am come
again! and call our father, for home is not home till I shall
touch his hand, and see his face, and hear his voice once more!"

But Hugh only drew back, after betraying a momentary surprise, and
bent a grave stare upon the intruder--a stare which indicated
somewhat of offended dignity, at first, then changed, in response
to some inward thought or purpose, to an expression of marvelling
curiosity, mixed with a real or assumed compassion.  Presently he
said, in a mild voice--

"Thy wits seem touched, poor stranger; doubtless thou hast
suffered privations and rude buffetings at the world's hands; thy
looks and dress betoken it.  Whom dost thou take me to be?"

"Take thee?  Prithee for whom else than whom thou art?  I take
thee to be Hugh Hendon," said Miles, sharply.

The other continued, in the same soft tone--

"And whom dost thou imagine thyself to be?"

"Imagination hath nought to do with it!  Dost thou pretend thou
knowest me not for thy brother Miles Hendon?"

An expression of pleased surprise flitted across Hugh's face, and
he exclaimed--

"What! thou art not jesting? can the dead come to life?  God be
praised if it be so!  Our poor lost boy restored to our arms after
all these cruel years!  Ah, it seems too good to be true, it IS
too good to be true--I charge thee, have pity, do not trifle with
me!  Quick--come to the light--let me scan thee well!"

He seized Miles by the arm, dragged him to the window, and began
to devour him from head to foot with his eyes, turning him this
way and that, and stepping briskly around him and about him to
prove him from all points of view; whilst the returned prodigal,
all aglow with gladness, smiled, laughed, and kept nodding his
head and saying--

"Go on, brother, go on, and fear not; thou'lt find nor limb nor
feature that cannot bide the test.  Scour and scan me to thy
content, my good old Hugh--I am indeed thy old Miles, thy same old
Miles, thy lost brother, is't not so?  Ah, 'tis a great day--I
SAID 'twas a great day!  Give me thy hand, give me thy cheek--
lord, I am like to die of very joy!"

He was about to throw himself upon his brother; but Hugh put up
his hand in dissent, then dropped his chin mournfully upon his
breast, saying with emotion--

"Ah, God of his mercy give me strength to bear this grievous
disappointment!"

Miles, amazed, could not speak for a moment; then he found his
tongue, and cried out--

"WHAT disappointment?  Am I not thy brother?"

Hugh shook his head sadly, and said--

"I pray heaven it may prove so, and that other eyes may find the
resemblances that are hid from mine.  Alack, I fear me the letter
spoke but too truly."

"What letter?"

"One that came from over sea, some six or seven years ago.  It
said my brother died in battle."

"It was a lie!  Call thy father--he will know me."

"One may not call the dead."

"Dead?" Miles's voice was subdued, and his lips trembled.  "My
father dead!--oh, this is heavy news.  Half my new joy is withered
now.  Prithee let me see my brother Arthur--he will know me; he
will know me and console me."

"He, also, is dead."

"God be merciful to me, a stricken man!  Gone,--both gone--the
worthy taken and the worthless spared, in me!  Ah! I crave your
mercy!--do not say the Lady Edith--"

"Is dead?  No, she lives."

"Then, God be praised, my joy is whole again!  Speed thee,
brother--let her come to me!  An' SHE say I am not myself--but she
will not; no, no, SHE will know me, I were a fool to doubt it.
Bring her--bring the old servants; they, too, will know me."

"All are gone but five--Peter, Halsey, David, Bernard, and
Margaret."

So saying, Hugh left the room.  Miles stood musing a while, then
began to walk the floor, muttering--

"The five arch-villains have survived the two-and-twenty leal and
honest--'tis an odd thing."

He continued walking back and forth, muttering to himself; he had
forgotten the King entirely.  By-and-by his Majesty said gravely,
and with a touch of genuine compassion, though the words
themselves were capable of being interpreted ironically--

"Mind not thy mischance, good man; there be others in the world
whose identity is denied, and whose claims are derided.  Thou hast
company."

"Ah, my King," cried Hendon, colouring slightly, "do not thou
condemn me--wait, and thou shalt see.  I am no impostor--she will
say it; you shall hear it from the sweetest lips in England.  I an
impostor?  Why, I know this old hall, these pictures of my
ancestors, and all these things that are about us, as a child
knoweth its own nursery.  Here was I born and bred, my lord; I
speak the truth; I would not deceive thee; and should none else
believe, I pray thee do not THOU doubt me--I could not bear it."

"I do not doubt thee," said the King, with a childlike simplicity
and faith.

"I thank thee out of my heart!" exclaimed Hendon with a fervency
which showed that he was touched.  The King added, with the same
gentle simplicity--

"Dost thou doubt ME?"

A guilty confusion seized upon Hendon, and he was grateful that
the door opened to admit Hugh, at that moment, and saved him the
necessity of replying.

A beautiful lady, richly clothed, followed Hugh, and after her
came several liveried servants.  The lady walked slowly, with her
head bowed and her eyes fixed upon the floor.  The face was
unspeakably sad.  Miles Hendon sprang forward, crying out--

"Oh, my Edith, my darling--"

But Hugh waved him back, gravely, and said to the lady--

"Look upon him.  Do you know him?"

At the sound of Miles's voice the woman had started slightly, and
her cheeks had flushed; she was trembling now.  She stood still,
during an impressive pause of several moments; then slowly lifted
up her head and looked into Hendon's eyes with a stony and
frightened gaze; the blood sank out of her face, drop by drop,
till nothing remained but the grey pallor of death; then she said,
in a voice as dead as the face, "I know him not!" and turned, with
a moan and a stifled sob, and tottered out of the room.

Miles Hendon sank into a chair and covered his face with his
hands.  After a pause, his brother said to the servants--

"You have observed him.  Do you know him?"

They shook their heads; then the master said--

"The servants know you not, sir.  I fear there is some mistake.
You have seen that my wife knew you not."

"Thy WIFE!"  In an instant Hugh was pinned to the wall, with an
iron grip about his throat.  "Oh, thou fox-hearted slave, I see it
all!  Thou'st writ the lying letter thyself, and my stolen bride
and goods are its fruit.  There--now get thee gone, lest I shame
mine honourable soldiership with the slaying of so pitiful a
mannikin!"

Hugh, red-faced, and almost suffocated, reeled to the nearest
chair, and commanded the servants to seize and bind the murderous
stranger.  They hesitated, and one of them said--

"He is armed, Sir Hugh, and we are weaponless."

"Armed!  What of it, and ye so many?  Upon him, I say!"

But Miles warned them to be careful what they did, and added--

"Ye know me of old--I have not changed; come on, an' it like you."

This reminder did not hearten the servants much; they still held
back.

"Then go, ye paltry cowards, and arm yourselves and guard the
doors, whilst I send one to fetch the watch!" said Hugh.  He
turned at the threshold, and said to Miles, "You'll find it to
your advantage to offend not with useless endeavours at escape."

"Escape?  Spare thyself discomfort, an' that is all that troubles
thee.  For Miles Hendon is master of Hendon Hall and all its
belongings.  He will remain--doubt it not."



Chapter XXVI. Disowned.

The King sat musing a few moments, then looked up and said--

"'Tis strange--most strange.  I cannot account for it."

"No, it is not strange, my liege.  I know him, and this conduct is
but natural.  He was a rascal from his birth."

"Oh, I spake not of HIM, Sir Miles."

"Not of him?  Then of what?  What is it that is strange?"

"That the King is not missed."

"How?  Which?  I doubt I do not understand."

"Indeed?  Doth it not strike you as being passing strange that the
land is not filled with couriers and proclamations describing my
person and making search for me?  Is it no matter for commotion
and distress that the Head of the State is gone; that I am
vanished away and lost?"

"Most true, my King, I had forgot."  Then Hendon sighed, and
muttered to himself, "Poor ruined mind--still busy with its
pathetic dream."

"But I have a plan that shall right us both--I will write a paper,
in three tongues--Latin, Greek and English--and thou shalt haste
away with it to London in the morning.  Give it to none but my
uncle, the Lord Hertford; when he shall see it, he will know and
say I wrote it.  Then he will send for me."

"Might it not be best, my Prince, that we wait here until I prove
myself and make my rights secure to my domains?  I should be so
much the better able then to--"

The King interrupted him imperiously--

"Peace!  What are thy paltry domains, thy trivial interests,
contrasted with matters which concern the weal of a nation and the
integrity of a throne?"  Then, he added, in a gentle voice, as if
he were sorry for his severity, "Obey, and have no fear; I will
right thee, I will make thee whole--yes, more than whole.  I shall
remember, and requite."

So saying, he took the pen, and set himself to work.  Hendon
contemplated him lovingly a while, then said to himself--

"An' it were dark, I should think it WAS a king that spoke;
there's no denying it, when the humour's upon on him he doth
thunder and lighten like your true King; now where got he that
trick?  See him scribble and scratch away contentedly at his
meaningless pot-hooks, fancying them to be Latin and Greek--and
except my wit shall serve me with a lucky device for diverting him
from his purpose, I shall be forced to pretend to post away to-
morrow on this wild errand he hath invented for me."

The next moment Sir Miles's thoughts had gone back to the recent
episode.  So absorbed was he in his musings, that when the King
presently handed him the paper which he had been writing, he
received it and pocketed it without being conscious of the act.
"How marvellous strange she acted," he muttered.  "I think she
knew me--and I think she did NOT know me.  These opinions do
conflict, I perceive it plainly; I cannot reconcile them, neither
can I, by argument, dismiss either of the two, or even persuade
one to outweigh the other.  The matter standeth simply thus:  she
MUST have known my face, my figure, my voice, for how could it be
otherwise?  Yet she SAID she knew me not, and that is proof
perfect, for she cannot lie.  But stop--I think I begin to see.
Peradventure he hath influenced her, commanded her, compelled her
to lie.  That is the solution.  The riddle is unriddled.  She
seemed dead with fear--yes, she was under his compulsion.  I will
seek her; I will find her; now that he is away, she will speak her
true mind.  She will remember the old times when we were little
playfellows together, and this will soften her heart, and she will
no more betray me, but will confess me.  There is no treacherous
blood in her--no, she was always honest and true.  She has loved
me, in those old days--this is my security; for whom one has
loved, one cannot betray."

He stepped eagerly toward the door; at that moment it opened, and
the Lady Edith entered.  She was very pale, but she walked with a
firm step, and her carriage was full of grace and gentle dignity.
Her face was as sad as before.

Miles sprang forward, with a happy confidence, to meet her, but
she checked him with a hardly perceptible gesture, and he stopped
where he was.  She seated herself, and asked him to do likewise.
Thus simply did she take the sense of old comradeship out of him,
and transform him into a stranger and a guest.  The surprise of
it, the bewildering unexpectedness of it, made him begin to
question, for a moment, if he WAS the person he was pretending to
be, after all.  The Lady Edith said--

"Sir, I have come to warn you.  The mad cannot be persuaded out of
their delusions, perchance; but doubtless they may be persuaded to
avoid perils.  I think this dream of yours hath the seeming of
honest truth to you, and therefore is not criminal--but do not
tarry here with it; for here it is dangerous."  She looked
steadily into Miles's face a moment, then added, impressively, "It
is the more dangerous for that you ARE much like what our lost lad
must have grown to be if he had lived."

"Heavens, madam, but I AM he!"

"I truly think you think it, sir.  I question not your honesty in
that; I but warn you, that is all.  My husband is master in this
region; his power hath hardly any limit; the people prosper or
starve, as he wills.  If you resembled not the man whom you
profess to be, my husband might bid you pleasure yourself with
your dream in peace; but trust me, I know him well; I know what he
will do; he will say to all that you are but a mad impostor, and
straightway all will echo him."  She bent upon Miles that same
steady look once more, and added:  "If you WERE Miles Hendon, and
he knew it and all the region knew it--consider what I am saying,
weigh it well--you would stand in the same peril, your punishment
would be no less sure; he would deny you and denounce you, and
none would be bold enough to give you countenance."

"Most truly I believe it," said Miles, bitterly.  "The power that
can command one life-long friend to betray and disown another, and
be obeyed, may well look to be obeyed in quarters where bread and
life are on the stake and no cobweb ties of loyalty and honour are
concerned."

A faint tinge appeared for a moment in the lady's cheek, and she
dropped her eyes to the floor; but her voice betrayed no emotion
when she proceeded--

"I have warned you--I must still warn you--to go hence.  This man
will destroy you, else.  He is a tyrant who knows no pity.  I, who
am his fettered slave, know this.  Poor Miles, and Arthur, and my
dear guardian, Sir Richard, are free of him, and at rest:  better
that you were with them than that you bide here in the clutches of
this miscreant.  Your pretensions are a menace to his title and
possessions; you have assaulted him in his own house:  you are
ruined if you stay.  Go--do not hesitate.  If you lack money, take
this purse, I beg of you, and bribe the servants to let you pass.
Oh, be warned, poor soul, and escape while you may."

Miles declined the purse with a gesture, and rose up and stood
before her.

"Grant me one thing," he said.  "Let your eyes rest upon mine, so
that I may see if they be steady.  There--now answer me.  Am I
Miles Hendon?"

"No.  I know you not."

"Swear it!"

The answer was low, but distinct--

"I swear."

"Oh, this passes belief!"

"Fly!  Why will you waste the precious time?  Fly, and save
yourself."

At that moment the officers burst into the room, and a violent
struggle began; but Hendon was soon overpowered and dragged away.
The King was taken also, and both were bound and led to prison.



Chapter XXVII. In prison.

The cells were all crowded; so the two friends were chained in a
large room where persons charged with trifling offences were
commonly kept.  They had company, for there were some twenty
manacled and fettered prisoners here, of both sexes and of varying
ages,--an obscene and noisy gang.  The King chafed bitterly over
the stupendous indignity thus put upon his royalty, but Hendon was
moody and taciturn.  He was pretty thoroughly bewildered; he had
come home, a jubilant prodigal, expecting to find everybody wild
with joy over his return; and instead had got the cold shoulder
and a jail.  The promise and the fulfilment differed so widely
that the effect was stunning; he could not decide whether it was
most tragic or most grotesque.  He felt much as a man might who
had danced blithely out to enjoy a rainbow, and got struck by
lightning.

But gradually his confused and tormenting thoughts settled down
into some sort of order, and then his mind centred itself upon
Edith.  He turned her conduct over, and examined it in all lights,
but he could not make anything satisfactory out of it.  Did she
know him--or didn't she know him?  It was a perplexing puzzle, and
occupied him a long time; but he ended, finally, with the
conviction that she did know him, and had repudiated him for
interested reasons.  He wanted to load her name with curses now;
but this name had so long been sacred to him that he found he
could not bring his tongue to profane it.

Wrapped in prison blankets of a soiled and tattered condition,
Hendon and the King passed a troubled night.  For a bribe the
jailer had furnished liquor to some of the prisoners; singing of
ribald songs, fighting, shouting, and carousing was the natural
consequence.  At last, a while after midnight, a man attacked a
woman and nearly killed her by beating her over the head with his
manacles before the jailer could come to the rescue.  The jailer
restored peace by giving the man a sound clubbing about the head
and shoulders--then the carousing ceased; and after that, all had
an opportunity to sleep who did not mind the annoyance of the
moanings and groanings of the two wounded people.

During the ensuing week, the days and nights were of a monotonous
sameness as to events; men whose faces Hendon remembered more or
less distinctly, came, by day, to gaze at the 'impostor' and
repudiate and insult him; and by night the carousing and brawling
went on with symmetrical regularity.  However, there was a change
of incident at last.  The jailer brought in an old man, and said
to him--

"The villain is in this room--cast thy old eyes about and see if
thou canst say which is he."

Hendon glanced up, and experienced a pleasant sensation for the
first time since he had been in the jail.  He said to himself,
"This is Blake Andrews, a servant all his life in my father's
family--a good honest soul, with a right heart in his breast.
That is, formerly.  But none are true now; all are liars.  This
man will know me--and will deny me, too, like the rest."

The old man gazed around the room, glanced at each face in turn,
and finally said--

"I see none here but paltry knaves, scum o' the streets.  Which is
he?"

The jailer laughed.

"Here," he said; "scan this big animal, and grant me an opinion."

The old man approached, and looked Hendon over, long and
earnestly, then shook his head and said--

"Marry, THIS is no Hendon--nor ever was!"

"Right!  Thy old eyes are sound yet.  An' I were Sir Hugh, I would
take the shabby carle and--"

The jailer finished by lifting himself a-tip-toe with an imaginary
halter, at the same time making a gurgling noise in his throat
suggestive of suffocation.  The old man said, vindictively--

"Let him bless God an' he fare no worse.  An' _I_ had the handling
o' the villain he should roast, or I am no true man!"

The jailer laughed a pleasant hyena laugh, and said--

"Give him a piece of thy mind, old man--they all do it.  Thou'lt
find it good diversion."

Then he sauntered toward his ante-room and disappeared.  The old
man dropped upon his knees and whispered--

"God be thanked, thou'rt come again, my master!  I believed thou
wert dead these seven years, and lo, here thou art alive!  I knew
thee the moment I saw thee; and main hard work it was to keep a
stony countenance and seem to see none here but tuppenny knaves
and rubbish o' the streets.  I am old and poor, Sir Miles; but say
the word and I will go forth and proclaim the truth though I be
strangled for it."

"No," said Hendon; "thou shalt not.  It would ruin thee, and yet
help but little in my cause.  But I thank thee, for thou hast
given me back somewhat of my lost faith in my kind."

The old servant became very valuable to Hendon and the King; for
he dropped in several times a day to 'abuse' the former, and
always smuggled in a few delicacies to help out the prison bill of
fare; he also furnished the current news.  Hendon reserved the
dainties for the King; without them his Majesty might not have
survived, for he was not able to eat the coarse and wretched food
provided by the jailer.  Andrews was obliged to confine himself to
brief visits, in order to avoid suspicion; but he managed to
impart a fair degree of information each time--information
delivered in a low voice, for Hendon's benefit, and interlarded
with insulting epithets delivered in a louder voice for the
benefit of other hearers.

So, little by little, the story of the family came out.  Arthur
had been dead six years.  This loss, with the absence of news from
Hendon, impaired the father's health; he believed he was going to
die, and he wished to see Hugh and Edith settled in life before he
passed away; but Edith begged hard for delay, hoping for Miles's
return; then the letter came which brought the news of Miles's
death; the shock prostrated Sir Richard; he believed his end was
very near, and he and Hugh insisted upon the marriage; Edith
begged for and obtained a month's respite, then another, and
finally a third; the marriage then took place by the death-bed of
Sir Richard.  It had not proved a happy one.  It was whispered
about the country that shortly after the nuptials the bride found
among her husband's papers several rough and incomplete drafts of
the fatal letter, and had accused him of precipitating the
marriage--and Sir Richard's death, too--by a wicked forgery.
Tales of cruelty to the Lady Edith and the servants were to be
heard on all hands; and since the father's death Sir Hugh had
thrown off all soft disguises and become a pitiless master toward
all who in any way depended upon him and his domains for bread.

There was a bit of Andrew's gossip which the King listened to with
a lively interest--

"There is rumour that the King is mad.  But in charity forbear to
say _I_ mentioned it, for 'tis death to speak of it, they say."

His Majesty glared at the old man and said--

"The King is NOT mad, good man--and thou'lt find it to thy
advantage to busy thyself with matters that nearer concern thee
than this seditious prattle."

"What doth the lad mean?" said Andrews, surprised at this brisk
assault from such an unexpected quarter.  Hendon gave him a sign,
and he did not pursue his question, but went on with his budget--

"The late King is to be buried at Windsor in a day or two--the
16th of the month--and the new King will be crowned at Westminster
the 20th."

"Methinks they must needs find him first," muttered his Majesty;
then added, confidently, "but they will look to that--and so also
shall I."

"In the name of--"

But the old man got no further--a warning sign from Hendon checked
his remark.  He resumed the thread of his gossip--

"Sir Hugh goeth to the coronation--and with grand hopes.  He
confidently looketh to come back a peer, for he is high in favour
with the Lord Protector."

"What Lord Protector?" asked his Majesty.

"His Grace the Duke of Somerset."

"What Duke of Somerset?"

"Marry, there is but one--Seymour, Earl of Hertford."

The King asked sharply--

"Since when is HE a duke, and Lord Protector?"

"Since the last day of January."

"And prithee who made him so?"

"Himself and the Great Council--with help of the King."

His Majesty started violently.  "The KING!" he cried.  "WHAT king,
good sir?"

"What king, indeed! (God-a-mercy, what aileth the boy?)  Sith we
have but one, 'tis not difficult to answer--his most sacred
Majesty King Edward the Sixth--whom God preserve!  Yea, and a dear
and gracious little urchin is he, too; and whether he be mad or
no--and they say he mendeth daily--his praises are on all men's
lips; and all bless him, likewise, and offer prayers that he may
be spared to reign long in England; for he began humanely with
saving the old Duke of Norfolk's life, and now is he bent on
destroying the cruellest of the laws that harry and oppress the
people."

This news struck his Majesty dumb with amazement, and plunged him
into so deep and dismal a reverie that he heard no more of the old
man's gossip.  He wondered if the 'little urchin' was the beggar-
boy whom he left dressed in his own garments in the palace.  It
did not seem possible that this could be, for surely his manners
and speech would betray him if he pretended to be the Prince of
Wales--then he would be driven out, and search made for the true
prince.  Could it be that the Court had set up some sprig of the
nobility in his place?  No, for his uncle would not allow that--he
was all-powerful and could and would crush such a movement, of
course.  The boy's musings profited him nothing; the more he tried
to unriddle the mystery the more perplexed he became, the more his
head ached, and the worse he slept.  His impatience to get to
London grew hourly, and his captivity became almost unendurable.

Hendon's arts all failed with the King--he could not be comforted;
but a couple of women who were chained near him succeeded better.
Under their gentle ministrations he found peace and learned a
degree of patience.  He was very grateful, and came to love them
dearly and to delight in the sweet and soothing influence of their
presence.  He asked them why they were in prison, and when they
said they were Baptists, he smiled, and inquired--

"Is that a crime to be shut up for in a prison?  Now I grieve, for
I shall lose ye--they will not keep ye long for such a little
thing."

They did not answer; and something in their faces made him uneasy.
He said, eagerly--

"You do not speak; be good to me, and tell me--there will be no
other punishment?  Prithee tell me there is no fear of that."

They tried to change the topic, but his fears were aroused, and he
pursued it--

"Will they scourge thee?  No, no, they would not be so cruel!  Say
they would not.  Come, they WILL not, will they?"

The women betrayed confusion and distress, but there was no
avoiding an answer, so one of them said, in a voice choked with
emotion--

"Oh, thou'lt break our hearts, thou gentle spirit!--God will help
us to bear our--"

"It is a confession!" the King broke in.  "Then they WILL scourge
thee, the stony-hearted wretches!  But oh, thou must not weep, I
cannot bear it.  Keep up thy courage--I shall come to my own in
time to save thee from this bitter thing, and I will do it!"

When the King awoke in the morning, the women were gone.

"They are saved!" he said, joyfully; then added, despondently,
"but woe is me!--for they were my comforters."

Each of them had left a shred of ribbon pinned to his clothing, in
token of remembrance.  He said he would keep these things always;
and that soon he would seek out these dear good friends of his and
take them under his protection.

Just then the jailer came in with some subordinates, and commanded
that the prisoners be conducted to the jail-yard.  The King was
overjoyed--it would be a blessed thing to see the blue sky and
breathe the fresh air once more.  He fretted and chafed at the
slowness of the officers, but his turn came at last, and he was
released from his staple and ordered to follow the other prisoners
with Hendon.

The court or quadrangle was stone-paved, and open to the sky.  The
prisoners entered it through a massive archway of masonry, and
were placed in file, standing, with their backs against the wall.
A rope was stretched in front of them, and they were also guarded
by their officers.  It was a chill and lowering morning, and a
light snow which had fallen during the night whitened the great
empty space and added to the general dismalness of its aspect.
Now and then a wintry wind shivered through the place and sent the
snow eddying hither and thither.

In the centre of the court stood two women, chained to posts.  A
glance showed the King that these were his good friends.  He
shuddered, and said to himself, "Alack, they are not gone free, as
I had thought.  To think that such as these should know the lash!-
-in England!  Ay, there's the shame of it--not in Heathennesse,
Christian England!  They will be scourged; and I, whom they have
comforted and kindly entreated, must look on and see the great
wrong done; it is strange, so strange, that I, the very source of
power in this broad realm, am helpless to protect them.  But let
these miscreants look well to themselves, for there is a day
coming when I will require of them a heavy reckoning for this
work.  For every blow they strike now, they shall feel a hundred
then."

A great gate swung open, and a crowd of citizens poured in.  They
flocked around the two women, and hid them from the King's view.
A clergyman entered and passed through the crowd, and he also was
hidden.  The King now heard talking, back and forth, as if
questions were being asked and answered, but he could not make out
what was said.  Next there was a deal of bustle and preparation,
and much passing and repassing of officials through that part of
the crowd that stood on the further side of the women; and whilst
this proceeded a deep hush gradually fell upon the people.

Now, by command, the masses parted and fell aside, and the King
saw a spectacle that froze the marrow in his bones.  Faggots had
been piled about the two women, and a kneeling man was lighting
them!

The women bowed their heads, and covered their faces with their
hands; the yellow flames began to climb upward among the snapping
and crackling faggots, and wreaths of blue smoke to stream away on
the wind; the clergyman lifted his hands and began a prayer--just
then two young girls came flying through the great gate, uttering
piercing screams, and threw themselves upon the women at the
stake.  Instantly they were torn away by the officers, and one of
them was kept in a tight grip, but the other broke loose, saying
she would die with her mother; and before she could be stopped she
had flung her arms about her mother's neck again.  She was torn
away once more, and with her gown on fire.  Two or three men held
her, and the burning portion of her gown was snatched off and
thrown flaming aside, she struggling all the while to free
herself, and saying she would be alone in the world, now; and
begging to be allowed to die with her mother.  Both the girls
screamed continually, and fought for freedom; but suddenly this
tumult was drowned under a volley of heart-piercing shrieks of
mortal agony--the King glanced from the frantic girls to the
stake, then turned away and leaned his ashen face against the
wall, and looked no more.  He said, "That which I have seen, in
that one little moment, will never go out from my memory, but will
abide there; and I shall see it all the days, and dream of it all
the nights, till I die.  Would God I had been blind!"

Hendon was watching the King.  He said to himself, with
satisfaction, "His disorder mendeth; he hath changed, and groweth
gentler.  If he had followed his wont, he would have stormed at
these varlets, and said he was King, and commanded that the women
be turned loose unscathed.  Soon his delusion will pass away and
be forgotten, and his poor mind will be whole again.  God speed
the day!"

That same day several prisoners were brought in to remain over
night, who were being conveyed, under guard, to various places in
the kingdom, to undergo punishment for crimes committed.  The King
conversed with these--he had made it a point, from the beginning,
to instruct himself for the kingly office by questioning prisoners
whenever the opportunity offered--and the tale of their woes wrung
his heart.  One of them was a poor half-witted woman who had
stolen a yard or two of cloth from a weaver--she was to be hanged
for it.  Another was a man who had been accused of stealing a
horse; he said the proof had failed, and he had imagined that he
was safe from the halter; but no--he was hardly free before he was
arraigned for killing a deer in the King's park; this was proved
against him, and now he was on his way to the gallows.  There was
a tradesman's apprentice whose case particularly distressed the
King; this youth said he found a hawk, one evening, that had
escaped from its owner, and he took it home with him, imagining
himself entitled to it; but the court convicted him of stealing
it, and sentenced him to death.

The King was furious over these inhumanities, and wanted Hendon to
break jail and fly with him to Westminster, so that he could mount
his throne and hold out his sceptre in mercy over these
unfortunate people and save their lives.  "Poor child," sighed
Hendon, "these woeful tales have brought his malady upon him
again; alack, but for this evil hap, he would have been well in a
little time."

Among these prisoners was an old lawyer--a man with a strong face
and a dauntless mien.  Three years past, he had written a pamphlet
against the Lord Chancellor, accusing him of injustice, and had
been punished for it by the loss of his ears in the pillory, and
degradation from the bar, and in addition had been fined 3,000
pounds and sentenced to imprisonment for life.  Lately he had
repeated his offence; and in consequence was now under sentence to
lose WHAT REMAINED OF HIS EARS, pay a fine of 5,000 pounds, be
branded on both cheeks, and remain in prison for life.

"These be honourable scars," he said, and turned back his grey
hair and showed the mutilated stubs of what had once been his
ears.

The King's eye burned with passion.  He said--

"None believe in me--neither wilt thou.  But no matter--within the
compass of a month thou shalt be free; and more, the laws that
have dishonoured thee, and shamed the English name, shall be swept
from the statute books.  The world is made wrong; kings should go
to school to their own laws, at times, and so learn mercy." {1}



Chapter XXVIII. The sacrifice.

Meantime Miles was growing sufficiently tired of confinement and
inaction.  But now his trial came on, to his great gratification,
and he thought he could welcome any sentence provided a further
imprisonment should not be a part of it.  But he was mistaken
about that.  He was in a fine fury when he found himself described
as a 'sturdy vagabond' and sentenced to sit two hours in the
stocks for bearing that character and for assaulting the master of
Hendon Hall.  His pretensions as to brothership with his
prosecutor, and rightful heirship to the Hendon honours and
estates, were left contemptuously unnoticed, as being not even
worth examination.

He raged and threatened on his way to punishment, but it did no
good; he was snatched roughly along by the officers, and got an
occasional cuff, besides, for his irreverent conduct.

The King could not pierce through the rabble that swarmed behind;
so he was obliged to follow in the rear, remote from his good
friend and servant.  The King had been nearly condemned to the
stocks himself for being in such bad company, but had been let off
with a lecture and a warning, in consideration of his youth.  When
the crowd at last halted, he flitted feverishly from point to
point around its outer rim, hunting a place to get through; and at
last, after a deal of difficulty and delay, succeeded.  There sat
his poor henchman in the degrading stocks, the sport and butt of a
dirty mob--he, the body servant of the King of England!  Edward
had heard the sentence pronounced, but he had not realised the
half that it meant.  His anger began to rise as the sense of this
new indignity which had been put upon him sank home; it jumped to
summer heat, the next moment, when he saw an egg sail through the
air and crush itself against Hendon's cheek, and heard the crowd
roar its enjoyment of the episode.  He sprang across the open
circle and confronted the officer in charge, crying--

"For shame!  This is my servant--set him free!  I am the--"

"Oh, peace!" exclaimed Hendon, in a panic, "thou'lt destroy
thyself.  Mind him not, officer, he is mad."

"Give thyself no trouble as to the matter of minding him, good
man, I have small mind to mind him; but as to teaching him
somewhat, to that I am well inclined."  He turned to a subordinate
and said, "Give the little fool a taste or two of the lash, to
mend his manners."

"Half a dozen will better serve his turn," suggested Sir Hugh, who
had ridden up, a moment before, to take a passing glance at the
proceedings.

The King was seized.  He did not even struggle, so paralysed was
he with the mere thought of the monstrous outrage that was
proposed to be inflicted upon his sacred person.  History was
already defiled with the record of the scourging of an English
king with whips--it was an intolerable reflection that he must
furnish a duplicate of that shameful page.  He was in the toils,
there was no help for him; he must either take this punishment or
beg for its remission.  Hard conditions; he would take the
stripes--a king might do that, but a king could not beg.

But meantime, Miles Hendon was resolving the difficulty.  "Let the
child go," said he; "ye heartless dogs, do ye not see how young
and frail he is?  Let him go--I will take his lashes."

"Marry, a good thought--and thanks for it," said Sir Hugh, his
face lighting with a sardonic satisfaction.  "Let the little
beggar go, and give this fellow a dozen in his place--an honest
dozen, well laid on."  The King was in the act of entering a
fierce protest, but Sir Hugh silenced him with the potent remark,
"Yes, speak up, do, and free thy mind--only, mark ye, that for
each word you utter he shall get six strokes the more."

Hendon was removed from the stocks, and his back laid bare; and
whilst the lash was applied the poor little King turned away his
face and allowed unroyal tears to channel his cheeks unchecked.
"Ah, brave good heart," he said to himself, "this loyal deed shall
never perish out of my memory.  I will not forget it--and neither
shall THEY!" he added, with passion.  Whilst he mused, his
appreciation of Hendon's magnanimous conduct grew to greater and
still greater dimensions in his mind, and so also did his
gratefulness for it.  Presently he said to himself, "Who saves his
prince from wounds and possible death--and this he did for me--
performs high service; but it is little--it is nothing--oh, less
than nothing!--when 'tis weighed against the act of him who saves
his prince from SHAME!"

Hendon made no outcry under the scourge, but bore the heavy blows
with soldierly fortitude.  This, together with his redeeming the
boy by taking his stripes for him, compelled the respect of even
that forlorn and degraded mob that was gathered there; and its
gibes and hootings died away, and no sound remained but the sound
of the falling blows.  The stillness that pervaded the place, when
Hendon found himself once more in the stocks, was in strong
contrast with the insulting clamour which had prevailed there so
little a while before.  The King came softly to Hendon's side, and
whispered in his ear--

"Kings cannot ennoble thee, thou good, great soul, for One who is
higher than kings hath done that for thee; but a king can confirm
thy nobility to men."  He picked up the scourge from the ground,
touched Hendon's bleeding shoulders lightly with it, and
whispered, "Edward of England dubs thee Earl!"

Hendon was touched.  The water welled to his eyes, yet at the same
time the grisly humour of the situation and circumstances so
undermined his gravity that it was all he could do to keep some
sign of his inward mirth from showing outside.  To be suddenly
hoisted, naked and gory, from the common stocks to the Alpine
altitude and splendour of an Earldom, seemed to him the last
possibility in the line of the grotesque.  He said to himself,
"Now am I finely tinselled, indeed!  The spectre-knight of the
Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows is become a spectre-earl--a dizzy
flight for a callow wing!  An' this go on, I shall presently be
hung like a very maypole with fantastic gauds and make-believe
honours.  But I shall value them, all valueless as they are, for
the love that doth bestow them.  Better these poor mock dignities
of mine, that come unasked, from a clean hand and a right spirit,
than real ones bought by servility from grudging and interested
power."

The dreaded Sir Hugh wheeled his horse about, and as he spurred
away, the living wall divided silently to let him pass, and as
silently closed together again.  And so remained; nobody went so
far as to venture a remark in favour of the prisoner, or in
compliment to him; but no matter--the absence of abuse was a
sufficient homage in itself.  A late comer who was not posted as
to the present circumstances, and who delivered a sneer at the
'impostor,' and was in the act of following it with a dead cat,
was promptly knocked down and kicked out, without any words, and
then the deep quiet resumed sway once more.



Chapter XXIX. To London.

When Hendon's term of service in the stocks was finished, he was
released and ordered to quit the region and come back no more.
His sword was restored to him, and also his mule and his donkey.
He mounted and rode off, followed by the King, the crowd opening
with quiet respectfulness to let them pass, and then dispersing
when they were gone.

Hendon was soon absorbed in thought.  There were questions of high
import to be answered.  What should he do?  Whither should he go?
Powerful help must be found somewhere, or he must relinquish his
inheritance and remain under the imputation of being an impostor
besides.  Where could he hope to find this powerful help?  Where,
indeed!  It was a knotty question.  By-and-by a thought occurred
to him which pointed to a possibility--the slenderest of slender
possibilities, certainly, but still worth considering, for lack of
any other that promised anything at all.  He remembered what old
Andrews had said about the young King's goodness and his generous
championship of the wronged and unfortunate.  Why not go and try
to get speech of him and beg for justice?  Ah, yes, but could so
fantastic a pauper get admission to the august presence of a
monarch?  Never mind--let that matter take care of itself; it was
a bridge that would not need to be crossed till he should come to
it.  He was an old campaigner, and used to inventing shifts and
expedients:  no doubt he would be able to find a way.  Yes, he
would strike for the capital.  Maybe his father's old friend Sir
Humphrey Marlow would help him--'good old Sir Humphrey, Head
Lieutenant of the late King's kitchen, or stables, or something'--
Miles could not remember just what or which.  Now that he had
something to turn his energies to, a distinctly defined object to
accomplish, the fog of humiliation and depression which had
settled down upon his spirits lifted and blew away, and he raised
his head and looked about him.  He was surprised to see how far he
had come; the village was away behind him.  The King was jogging
along in his wake, with his head bowed; for he, too, was deep in
plans and thinkings.  A sorrowful misgiving clouded Hendon's new-
born cheerfulness:  would the boy be willing to go again to a city
where, during all his brief life, he had never known anything but
ill-usage and pinching want?  But the question must be asked; it
could not be avoided; so Hendon reined up, and called out--

"I had forgotten to inquire whither we are bound.  Thy commands,
my liege!"

"To London!"

Hendon moved on again, mightily contented with the answer--but
astounded at it too.

The whole journey was made without an adventure of importance.
But it ended with one.  About ten o'clock on the night of the 19th
of February they stepped up