on London Bridge, in the midst of a
writhing, struggling jam of howling and hurrahing people, whose
beer-jolly faces stood out strongly in the glare from manifold
torches--and at that instant the decaying head of some former duke
or other grandee tumbled down between them, striking Hendon on the
elbow and then bounding off among the hurrying confusion of feet.
So evanescent and unstable are men's works in this world!--the
late good King is but three weeks dead and three days in his
grave, and already the adornments which he took such pains to
select from prominent people for his noble bridge are falling.  A
citizen stumbled over that head, and drove his own head into the
back of somebody in front of him, who turned and knocked down the
first person that came handy, and was promptly laid out himself by
that person's friend.  It was the right ripe time for a free
fight, for the festivities of the morrow--Coronation Day--were
already beginning; everybody was full of strong drink and
patriotism; within five minutes the free fight was occupying a
good deal of ground; within ten or twelve it covered an acre of
so, and was become a riot.  By this time Hendon and the King were
hopelessly separated from each other and lost in the rush and
turmoil of the roaring masses of humanity.  And so we leave them.



Chapter XXX. Tom's progress.

Whilst the true King wandered about the land poorly clad, poorly
fed, cuffed and derided by tramps one while, herding with thieves
and murderers in a jail another, and called idiot and impostor by
all impartially, the mock King Tom Canty enjoyed quite a different
experience.

When we saw him last, royalty was just beginning to have a bright
side for him.  This bright side went on brightening more and more
every day:  in a very little while it was become almost all
sunshine and delightfulness.  He lost his fears; his misgivings
faded out and died; his embarrassments departed, and gave place to
an easy and confident bearing.  He worked the whipping-boy mine to
ever-increasing profit.

He ordered my Lady Elizabeth and my Lady Jane Grey into his
presence when he wanted to play or talk, and dismissed them when
he was done with them, with the air of one familiarly accustomed
to such performances.  It no longer confused him to have these
lofty personages kiss his hand at parting.

He came to enjoy being conducted to bed in state at night, and
dressed with intricate and solemn ceremony in the morning.  It
came to be a proud pleasure to march to dinner attended by a
glittering procession of officers of state and gentlemen-at-arms;
insomuch, indeed, that he doubled his guard of gentlemen-at-arms,
and made them a hundred.  He liked to hear the bugles sounding
down the long corridors, and the distant voices responding, "Way
for the King!"

He even learned to enjoy sitting in throned state in council, and
seeming to be something more than the Lord Protector's mouthpiece.
He liked to receive great ambassadors and their gorgeous trains,
and listen to the affectionate messages they brought from
illustrious monarchs who called him brother.  O happy Tom Canty,
late of Offal Court!

He enjoyed his splendid clothes, and ordered more:  he found his
four hundred servants too few for his proper grandeur, and trebled
them.  The adulation of salaaming courtiers came to be sweet music
to his ears.  He remained kind and gentle, and a sturdy and
determined champion of all that were oppressed, and he made
tireless war upon unjust laws:  yet upon occasion, being offended,
he could turn upon an earl, or even a duke, and give him a look
that would make him tremble.  Once, when his royal 'sister,' the
grimly holy Lady Mary, set herself to reason with him against the
wisdom of his course in pardoning so many people who would
otherwise be jailed, or hanged, or burned, and reminded him that
their august late father's prisons had sometimes contained as high
as sixty thousand convicts at one time, and that during his
admirable reign he had delivered seventy-two thousand thieves and
robbers over to death by the executioner, {9} the boy was filled
with generous indignation, and commanded her to go to her closet,
and beseech God to take away the stone that was in her breast, and
give her a human heart.

Did Tom Canty never feel troubled about the poor little rightful
prince who had treated him so kindly, and flown out with such hot
zeal to avenge him upon the insolent sentinel at the palace-gate?
Yes; his first royal days and nights were pretty well sprinkled
with painful thoughts about the lost prince, and with sincere
longings for his return, and happy restoration to his native
rights and splendours.  But as time wore on, and the prince did
not come, Tom's mind became more and more occupied with his new
and enchanting experiences, and by little and little the vanished
monarch faded almost out of his thoughts; and finally, when he did
intrude upon them at intervals, he was become an unwelcome
spectre, for he made Tom feel guilty and ashamed.

Tom's poor mother and sisters travelled the same road out of his
mind.  At first he pined for them, sorrowed for them, longed to
see them, but later, the thought of their coming some day in their
rags and dirt, and betraying him with their kisses, and pulling
him down from his lofty place, and dragging him back to penury and
degradation and the slums, made him shudder.  At last they ceased
to trouble his thoughts almost wholly.  And he was content, even
glad:  for, whenever their mournful and accusing faces did rise
before him now, they made him feel more despicable than the worms
that crawl.

At midnight of the 19th of February, Tom Canty was sinking to
sleep in his rich bed in the palace, guarded by his loyal vassals,
and surrounded by the pomps of royalty, a happy boy; for tomorrow
was the day appointed for his solemn crowning as King of England.
At that same hour, Edward, the true king, hungry and thirsty,
soiled and draggled, worn with travel, and clothed in rags and
shreds--his share of the results of the riot--was wedged in among
a crowd of people who were watching with deep interest certain
hurrying gangs of workmen who streamed in and out of Westminster
Abbey, busy as ants:  they were making the last preparation for
the royal coronation.



Chapter XXXI. The Recognition procession.

When Tom Canty awoke the next morning, the air was heavy with a
thunderous murmur:  all the distances were charged with it.  It
was music to him; for it meant that the English world was out in
its strength to give loyal welcome to the great day.

Presently Tom found himself once more the chief figure in a
wonderful floating pageant on the Thames; for by ancient custom
the 'recognition procession' through London must start from the
Tower, and he was bound thither.

When he arrived there, the sides of the venerable fortress seemed
suddenly rent in a thousand places, and from every rent leaped a
red tongue of flame and a white gush of smoke; a deafening
explosion followed, which drowned the shoutings of the multitude,
and made the ground tremble; the flame-jets, the smoke, and the
explosions, were repeated over and over again with marvellous
celerity, so that in a few moments the old Tower disappeared in
the vast fog of its own smoke, all but the very top of the tall
pile called the White Tower; this, with its banners, stood out
above the dense bank of vapour as a mountain-peak projects above a
cloud-rack.

Tom Canty, splendidly arrayed, mounted a prancing war-steed, whose
rich trappings almost reached to the ground; his 'uncle,' the Lord
Protector Somerset, similarly mounted, took place in his rear; the
King's Guard formed in single ranks on either side, clad in
burnished armour; after the Protector followed a seemingly
interminable procession of resplendent nobles attended by their
vassals; after these came the lord mayor and the aldermanic body,
in crimson velvet robes, and with their gold chains across their
breasts; and after these the officers and members of all the
guilds of London, in rich raiment, and bearing the showy banners
of the several corporations.  Also in the procession, as a special
guard of honour through the city, was the Ancient and Honourable
Artillery Company--an organisation already three hundred years old
at that time, and the only military body in England possessing the
privilege (which it still possesses in our day) of holding itself
independent of the commands of Parliament.  It was a brilliant
spectacle, and was hailed with acclamations all along the line, as
it took its stately way through the packed multitudes of citizens.
The chronicler says, 'The King, as he entered the city, was
received by the people with prayers, welcomings, cries, and tender
words, and all signs which argue an earnest love of subjects
toward their sovereign; and the King, by holding up his glad
countenance to such as stood afar off, and most tender language to
those that stood nigh his Grace, showed himself no less thankful
to receive the people's goodwill than they to offer it.  To all
that wished him well, he gave thanks.  To such as bade "God save
his Grace," he said in return, "God save you all!" and added that
"he thanked them with all his heart."  Wonderfully transported
were the people with the loving answers and gestures of their
King.'

In Fenchurch Street a 'fair child, in costly apparel,' stood on a
stage to welcome his Majesty to the city.  The last verse of his
greeting was in these words--

     'Welcome, O King! as much as hearts can think;
        Welcome, again, as much as tongue can tell,--
      Welcome to joyous tongues, and hearts that will not shrink:
        God thee preserve, we pray, and wish thee ever well.'

The people burst forth in a glad shout, repeating with one voice
what the child had said.  Tom Canty gazed abroad over the surging
sea of eager faces, and his heart swelled with exultation; and he
felt that the one thing worth living for in this world was to be a
king, and a nation's idol.  Presently he caught sight, at a
distance, of a couple of his ragged Offal Court comrades--one of
them the lord high admiral in his late mimic court, the other the
first lord of the bedchamber in the same pretentious fiction; and
his pride swelled higher than ever.  Oh, if they could only
recognise him now!  What unspeakable glory it would be, if they
could recognise him, and realise that the derided mock king of the
slums and back alleys was become a real King, with illustrious
dukes and princes for his humble menials, and the English world at
his feet!  But he had to deny himself, and choke down his desire,
for such a recognition might cost more than it would come to:  so
he turned away his head, and left the two soiled lads to go on
with their shoutings and glad adulations, unsuspicious of whom it
was they were lavishing them upon.

Every now and then rose the cry, "A largess! a largess!" and Tom
responded by scattering a handful of bright new coins abroad for
the multitude to scramble for.

The chronicler says, 'At the upper end of Gracechurch Street,
before the sign of the Eagle, the city had erected a gorgeous
arch, beneath which was a stage, which stretched from one side of
the street to the other.  This was an historical pageant,
representing the King's immediate progenitors.  There sat
Elizabeth of York in the midst of an immense white rose, whose
petals formed elaborate furbelows around her; by her side was
Henry VII., issuing out of a vast red rose, disposed in the same
manner:  the hands of the royal pair were locked together, and the
wedding-ring ostentatiously displayed.  From the red and white
roses proceeded a stem, which reached up to a second stage,
occupied by Henry VIII., issuing from a red and white rose, with
the effigy of the new King's mother, Jane Seymour, represented by
his side.  One branch sprang from this pair, which mounted to a
third stage, where sat the effigy of Edward VI. himself, enthroned
in royal majesty; and the whole pageant was framed with wreaths of
roses, red and white.'

This quaint and gaudy spectacle so wrought upon the rejoicing
people, that their acclamations utterly smothered the small voice
of the child whose business it was to explain the thing in
eulogistic rhymes.  But Tom Canty was not sorry; for this loyal
uproar was sweeter music to him than any poetry, no matter what
its quality might be.  Whithersoever Tom turned his happy young
face, the people recognised the exactness of his effigy's likeness
to himself, the flesh and blood counterpart; and new whirlwinds of
applause burst forth.

The great pageant moved on, and still on, under one triumphal arch
after another, and past a bewildering succession of spectacular
and symbolical tableaux, each of which typified and exalted some
virtue, or talent, or merit, of the little King's.  'Throughout
the whole of Cheapside, from every penthouse and window, hung
banners and streamers; and the richest carpets, stuffs, and cloth-
of-gold tapestried the streets--specimens of the great wealth of
the stores within; and the splendour of this thoroughfare was
equalled in the other streets, and in some even surpassed.'

"And all these wonders and these marvels are to welcome me--me!"
murmured Tom Canty.

The mock King's cheeks were flushed with excitement, his eyes were
flashing, his senses swam in a delirium of pleasure.  At this
point, just as he was raising his hand to fling another rich
largess, he caught sight of a pale, astounded face, which was
strained forward out of the second rank of the crowd, its intense
eyes riveted upon him.  A sickening consternation struck through
him; he recognised his mother! and up flew his hand, palm outward,
before his eyes--that old involuntary gesture, born of a forgotten
episode, and perpetuated by habit.  In an instant more she had
torn her way out of the press, and past the guards, and was at his
side.  She embraced his leg, she covered it with kisses, she
cried, "O my child, my darling!" lifting toward him a face that
was transfigured with joy and love.  The same instant an officer
of the King's Guard snatched her away with a curse, and sent her
reeling back whence she came with a vigorous impulse from his
strong arm.  The words "I do not know you, woman!" were falling
from Tom Canty's lips when this piteous thing occurred; but it
smote him to the heart to see her treated so; and as she turned
for a last glimpse of him, whilst the crowd was swallowing her
from his sight, she seemed so wounded, so broken-hearted, that a
shame fell upon him which consumed his pride to ashes, and
withered his stolen royalty.  His grandeurs were stricken
valueless:  they seemed to fall away from him like rotten rags.

The procession moved on, and still on, through ever augmenting
splendours and ever augmenting tempests of welcome; but to Tom
Canty they were as if they had not been.  He neither saw nor
heard.  Royalty had lost its grace and sweetness; its pomps were
become a reproach.  Remorse was eating his heart out.  He said,
"Would God I were free of my captivity!"

He had unconsciously dropped back into the phraseology of the
first days of his compulsory greatness.

The shining pageant still went winding like a radiant and
interminable serpent down the crooked lanes of the quaint old
city, and through the huzzaing hosts; but still the King rode with
bowed head and vacant eyes, seeing only his mother's face and that
wounded look in it.

"Largess, largess!"  The cry fell upon an unheeding ear.

"Long live Edward of England!"  It seemed as if the earth shook
with the explosion; but there was no response from the King.  He
heard it only as one hears the thunder of the surf when it is
blown to the ear out of a great distance, for it was smothered
under another sound which was still nearer, in his own breast, in
his accusing conscience--a voice which kept repeating those
shameful words, "I do not know you, woman!"

The words smote upon the King's soul as the strokes of a funeral
bell smite upon the soul of a surviving friend when they remind
him of secret treacheries suffered at his hands by him that is
gone.

New glories were unfolded at every turning; new wonders, new
marvels, sprang into view; the pent clamours of waiting batteries
were released; new raptures poured from the throats of the waiting
multitudes:  but the King gave no sign, and the accusing voice
that went moaning through his comfortless breast was all the sound
he heard.

By-and-by the gladness in the faces of the populace changed a
little, and became touched with a something like solicitude or
anxiety:  an abatement in the volume of the applause was
observable too.  The Lord Protector was quick to notice these
things:  he was as quick to detect the cause.  He spurred to the
King's side, bent low in his saddle, uncovered, and said--

"My liege, it is an ill time for dreaming.  The people observe thy
downcast head, thy clouded mien, and they take it for an omen.  Be
advised:  unveil the sun of royalty, and let it shine upon these
boding vapours, and disperse them.  Lift up thy face, and smile
upon the people."

So saying, the Duke scattered a handful of coins to right and
left, then retired to his place.  The mock King did mechanically
as he had been bidden.  His smile had no heart in it, but few eyes
were near enough or sharp enough to detect that.  The noddings of
his plumed head as he saluted his subjects were full of grace and
graciousness; the largess which he delivered from his hand was
royally liberal:  so the people's anxiety vanished, and the
acclamations burst forth again in as mighty a volume as before.

Still once more, a little before the progress was ended, the Duke
was obliged to ride forward, and make remonstrance.  He whispered-
-

"O dread sovereign! shake off these fatal humours; the eyes of the
world are upon thee."  Then he added with sharp annoyance,
"Perdition catch that crazy pauper! 'twas she that hath disturbed
your Highness."

The gorgeous figure turned a lustreless eye upon the Duke, and
said in a dead voice--

"She was my mother!"

"My God!" groaned the Protector as he reined his horse backward to
his post, "the omen was pregnant with prophecy.  He is gone mad
again!"



Chapter XXXII. Coronation Day.

Let us go backward a few hours, and place ourselves in Westminster
Abbey, at four o'clock in the morning of this memorable Coronation
Day.  We are not without company; for although it is still night,
we find the torch-lighted galleries already filling up with people
who are well content to sit still and wait seven or eight hours
till the time shall come for them to see what they may not hope to
see twice in their lives--the coronation of a King.  Yes, London
and Westminster have been astir ever since the warning guns boomed
at three o'clock, and already crowds of untitled rich folk who
have bought the privilege of trying to find sitting-room in the
galleries are flocking in at the entrances reserved for their
sort.

The hours drag along tediously enough.  All stir has ceased for
some time, for every gallery has long ago been packed.  We may
sit, now, and look and think at our leisure.  We have glimpses,
here and there and yonder, through the dim cathedral twilight, of
portions of many galleries and balconies, wedged full with other
people, the other portions of these galleries and balconies being
cut off from sight by intervening pillars and architectural
projections.  We have in view the whole of the great north
transept--empty, and waiting for England's privileged ones.  We
see also the ample area or platform, carpeted with rich stuffs,
whereon the throne stands.  The throne occupies the centre of the
platform, and is raised above it upon an elevation of four steps.
Within the seat of the throne is enclosed a rough flat rock--the
stone of Scone--which many generations of Scottish kings sat on to
be crowned, and so it in time became holy enough to answer a like
purpose for English monarchs.  Both the throne and its footstool
are covered with cloth of gold.

Stillness reigns, the torches blink dully, the time drags heavily.
But at last the lagging daylight asserts itself, the torches are
extinguished, and a mellow radiance suffuses the great spaces.
All features of the noble building are distinct now, but soft and
dreamy, for the sun is lightly veiled with clouds.

At seven o'clock the first break in the drowsy monotony occurs;
for on the stroke of this hour the first peeress enters the
transept, clothed like Solomon for splendour, and is conducted to
her appointed place by an official clad in satins and velvets,
whilst a duplicate of him gathers up the lady's long train,
follows after, and, when the lady is seated, arranges the train
across her lap for her.  He then places her footstool according to
her desire, after which he puts her coronet where it will be
convenient to her hand when the time for the simultaneous
coroneting of the nobles shall arrive.

By this time the peeresses are flowing in in a glittering stream,
and the satin-clad officials are flitting and glinting everywhere,
seating them and making them comfortable.  The scene is animated
enough now.  There is stir and life, and shifting colour
everywhere.  After a time, quiet reigns again; for the peeresses
are all come and are all in their places, a solid acre or such a
matter, of human flowers, resplendent in variegated colours, and
frosted like a Milky Way with diamonds.  There are all ages here:
brown, wrinkled, white-haired dowagers who are able to go back,
and still back, down the stream of time, and recall the crowning
of Richard III. and the troublous days of that old forgotten age;
and there are handsome middle-aged dames; and lovely and gracious
young matrons; and gentle and beautiful young girls, with beaming
eyes and fresh complexions, who may possibly put on their jewelled
coronets awkwardly when the great time comes; for the matter will
be new to them, and their excitement will be a sore hindrance.
Still, this may not happen, for the hair of all these ladies has
been arranged with a special view to the swift and successful
lodging of the crown in its place when the signal comes.

We have seen that this massed array of peeresses is sown thick
with diamonds, and we also see that it is a marvellous spectacle--
but now we are about to be astonished in earnest.  About nine, the
clouds suddenly break away and a shaft of sunshine cleaves the
mellow atmosphere, and drifts slowly along the ranks of ladies;
and every rank it touches flames into a dazzling splendour of
many-coloured fires, and we tingle to our finger-tips with the
electric thrill that is shot through us by the surprise and the
beauty of the spectacle!  Presently a special envoy from some
distant corner of the Orient, marching with the general body of
foreign ambassadors, crosses this bar of sunshine, and we catch
our breath, the glory that streams and flashes and palpitates
about him is so overpowering; for he is crusted from head to heel
with gems, and his slightest movement showers a dancing radiance
all around him.

Let us change the tense for convenience.  The time drifted along--
one hour--two hours--two hours and a half; then the deep booming
of artillery told that the King and his grand procession had
arrived at last; so the waiting multitude rejoiced.  All knew that
a further delay must follow, for the King must be prepared and
robed for the solemn ceremony; but this delay would be pleasantly
occupied by the assembling of the peers of the realm in their
stately robes.  These were conducted ceremoniously to their seats,
and their coronets placed conveniently at hand; and meanwhile the
multitude in the galleries were alive with interest, for most of
them were beholding for the first time, dukes, earls, and barons,
whose names had been historical for five hundred years.  When all
were finally seated, the spectacle from the galleries and all
coigns of vantage was complete; a gorgeous one to look upon and to
remember.

Now the robed and mitred great heads of the church, and their
attendants, filed in upon the platform and took their appointed
places; these were followed by the Lord Protector and other great
officials, and these again by a steel-clad detachment of the
Guard.

There was a waiting pause; then, at a signal, a triumphant peal of
music burst forth, and Tom Canty, clothed in a long robe of cloth
of gold, appeared at a door, and stepped upon the platform.  The
entire multitude rose, and the ceremony of the Recognition ensued.

Then a noble anthem swept the Abbey with its rich waves of sound;
and thus heralded and welcomed, Tom Canty was conducted to the
throne.  The ancient ceremonies went on, with impressive
solemnity, whilst the audience gazed; and as they drew nearer and
nearer to completion, Tom Canty grew pale, and still paler, and a
deep and steadily deepening woe and despondency settled down upon
his spirits and upon his remorseful heart.

At last the final act was at hand.  The Archbishop of Canterbury
lifted up the crown of England from its cushion and held it out
over the trembling mock-King's head.  In the same instant a
rainbow-radiance flashed along the spacious transept; for with one
impulse every individual in the great concourse of nobles lifted a
coronet and poised it over his or her head--and paused in that
attitude.

A deep hush pervaded the Abbey.  At this impressive moment, a
startling apparition intruded upon the scene--an apparition
observed by none in the absorbed multitude, until it suddenly
appeared, moving up the great central aisle.  It was a boy,
bareheaded, ill shod, and clothed in coarse plebeian garments that
were falling to rags.  He raised his hand with a solemnity which
ill comported with his soiled and sorry aspect, and delivered this
note of warning--

"I forbid you to set the crown of England upon that forfeited
head.  I am the King!"

In an instant several indignant hands were laid upon the boy; but
in the same instant Tom Canty, in his regal vestments, made a
swift step forward, and cried out in a ringing voice--

"Loose him and forbear!  He IS the King!"

A sort of panic of astonishment swept the assemblage, and they
partly rose in their places and stared in a bewildered way at one
another and at the chief figures in this scene, like persons who
wondered whether they were awake and in their senses, or asleep
and dreaming.  The Lord Protector was as amazed as the rest, but
quickly recovered himself, and exclaimed in a voice of authority--

"Mind not his Majesty, his malady is upon him again--seize the
vagabond!"

He would have been obeyed, but the mock-King stamped his foot and
cried out--

"On your peril!  Touch him not, he is the King!"

The hands were withheld; a paralysis fell upon the house; no one
moved, no one spoke; indeed, no one knew how to act or what to
say, in so strange and surprising an emergency.  While all minds
were struggling to right themselves, the boy still moved steadily
forward, with high port and confident mien; he had never halted
from the beginning; and while the tangled minds still floundered
helplessly, he stepped upon the platform, and the mock-King ran
with a glad face to meet him; and fell on his knees before him and
said--

"Oh, my lord the King, let poor Tom Canty be first to swear fealty
to thee, and say, 'Put on thy crown and enter into thine own
again!'"

The Lord Protector's eye fell sternly upon the new-comer's face;
but straightway the sternness vanished away, and gave place to an
expression of wondering surprise.  This thing happened also to the
other great officers.  They glanced at each other, and retreated a
step by a common and unconscious impulse.  The thought in each
mind was the same:  "What a strange resemblance!"

The Lord Protector reflected a moment or two in perplexity, then
he said, with grave respectfulness--

"By your favour, sir, I desire to ask certain questions which--"

"I will answer them, my lord."

The Duke asked him many questions about the Court, the late King,
the prince, the princesses--the boy answered them correctly and
without hesitating.  He described the rooms of state in the
palace, the late King's apartments, and those of the Prince of
Wales.

It was strange; it was wonderful; yes, it was unaccountable--so
all said that heard it.  The tide was beginning to turn, and Tom
Canty's hopes to run high, when the Lord Protector shook his head
and said--

"It is true it is most wonderful--but it is no more than our lord
the King likewise can do."  This remark, and this reference to
himself as still the King, saddened Tom Canty, and he felt his
hopes crumbling from under him.  "These are not PROOFS," added the
Protector.

The tide was turning very fast now, very fast indeed--but in the
wrong direction; it was leaving poor Tom Canty stranded on the
throne, and sweeping the other out to sea.  The Lord Protector
communed with himself--shook his head--the thought forced itself
upon him, "It is perilous to the State and to us all, to entertain
so fateful a riddle as this; it could divide the nation and
undermine the throne."  He turned and said--

"Sir Thomas, arrest this--No, hold!"  His face lighted, and he
confronted the ragged candidate with this question--

"Where lieth the Great Seal?  Answer me this truly, and the riddle
is unriddled; for only he that was Prince of Wales CAN so answer!
On so trivial a thing hang a throne and a dynasty!"

It was a lucky thought, a happy thought.  That it was so
considered by the great officials was manifested by the silent
applause that shot from eye to eye around their circle in the form
of bright approving glances.  Yes, none but the true prince could
dissolve the stubborn mystery of the vanished Great Seal--this
forlorn little impostor had been taught his lesson well, but here
his teachings must fail, for his teacher himself could not answer
THAT question--ah, very good, very good indeed; now we shall be
rid of this troublesome and perilous business in short order!  And
so they nodded invisibly and smiled inwardly with satisfaction,
and looked to see this foolish lad stricken with a palsy of guilty
confusion.  How surprised they were, then, to see nothing of the
sort happen--how they marvelled to hear him answer up promptly, in
a confident and untroubled voice, and say--

"There is nought in this riddle that is difficult."  Then, without
so much as a by-your-leave to anybody, he turned and gave this
command, with the easy manner of one accustomed to doing such
things: "My Lord St. John, go you to my private cabinet in the
palace--for none knoweth the place better than you--and, close
down to the floor, in the left corner remotest from the door that
opens from the ante-chamber, you shall find in the wall a brazen
nail-head; press upon it and a little jewel-closet will fly open
which not even you do know of--no, nor any sould else in all the
world but me and the trusty artisan that did contrive it for me.
The first thing that falleth under your eye will be the Great
Seal--fetch it hither."

All the company wondered at this speech, and wondered still more
to see the little mendicant pick out this peer without hesitancy
or apparent fear of mistake, and call him by name with such a
placidly convincing air of having known him all his life.  The
peer was almost surprised into obeying.  He even made a movement
as if to go, but quickly recovered his tranquil attitude and
confessed his blunder with a blush.  Tom Canty turned upon him and
said, sharply--

"Why dost thou hesitate?  Hast not heard the King's command?  Go!"

The Lord St. John made a deep obeisance--and it was observed that
it was a significantly cautious and non-committal one, it not
being delivered at either of the kings, but at the neutral ground
about half-way between the two--and took his leave.

Now began a movement of the gorgeous particles of that official
group which was slow, scarcely perceptible, and yet steady and
persistent--a movement such as is observed in a kaleidoscope that
is turned slowly, whereby the components of one splendid cluster
fall away and join themselves to another--a movement which, little
by little, in the present case, dissolved the glittering crowd
that stood about Tom Canty and clustered it together again in the
neighbourhood of the new-comer.  Tom Canty stood almost alone.
Now ensued a brief season of deep suspense and waiting--during
which even the few faint hearts still remaining near Tom Canty
gradually scraped together courage enough to glide, one by one,
over to the majority.  So at last Tom Canty, in his royal robes
and jewels, stood wholly alone and isolated from the world, a
conspicuous figure, occupying an eloquent vacancy.

Now the Lord St. John was seen returning.  As he advanced up the
mid-aisle the interest was so intense that the low murmur of
conversation in the great assemblage died out and was succeeded by
a profound hush, a breathless stillness, through which his
footfalls pulsed with a dull and distant sound.  Every eye was
fastened upon him as he moved along.  He reached the platform,
paused a moment, then moved toward Tom Canty with a deep
obeisance, and said--

"Sire, the Seal is not there!"

A mob does not melt away from the presence of a plague-patient
with more haste than the band of pallid and terrified courtiers
melted away from the presence of the shabby little claimant of the
Crown.  In a moment he stood all alone, without friend or
supporter, a target upon which was concentrated a bitter fire of
scornful and angry looks.  The Lord Protector called out fiercely-
-

"Cast the beggar into the street, and scourge him through the
town--the paltry knave is worth no more consideration!"

Officers of the guard sprang forward to obey, but Tom Canty waved
them off and said--

"Back!  Whoso touches him perils his life!"

The Lord Protector was perplexed in the last degree.  He said to
the Lord St. John--

"Searched you well?--but it boots not to ask that.  It doth seem
passing strange.  Little things, trifles, slip out of one's ken,
and one does not think it matter for surprise; but how so bulky a
thing as the Seal of England can vanish away and no man be able to
get track of it again--a massy golden disk--"

Tom Canty, with beaming eyes, sprang forward and shouted--

"Hold, that is enough!  Was it round?--and thick?--and had it
letters and devices graved upon it?--yes?  Oh, NOW I know what
this Great Seal is that there's been such worry and pother about.
An' ye had described it to me, ye could have had it three weeks
ago.  Right well I know where it lies; but it was not I that put
it there--first."

"Who, then, my liege?" asked the Lord Protector.

"He that stands there--the rightful King of England.  And he shall
tell you himself where it lies--then you will believe he knew it
of his own knowledge.  Bethink thee, my King--spur thy memory--it
was the last, the very LAST thing thou didst that day before thou
didst rush forth from the palace, clothed in my rags, to punish
the soldier that insulted me."

A silence ensued, undisturbed by a movement or a whisper, and all
eyes were fixed upon the new-comer, who stood, with bent head and
corrugated brow, groping in his memory among a thronging multitude
of valueless recollections for one single little elusive fact,
which, found, would seat him upon a throne--unfound, would leave
him as he was, for good and all--a pauper and an outcast.  Moment
after moment passed--the moments built themselves into minutes--
still the boy struggled silently on, and gave no sign.  But at
last he heaved a sigh, shook his head slowly, and said, with a
trembling lip and in a despondent voice--

"I call the scene back--all of it--but the Seal hath no place in
it."  He paused, then looked up, and said with gentle dignity, "My
lords and gentlemen, if ye will rob your rightful sovereign of his
own for lack of this evidence which he is not able to furnish, I
may not stay ye, being powerless.  But--"

"Oh, folly, oh, madness, my King!" cried Tom Canty, in a panic,
"wait!--think!  Do not give up!--the cause is not lost!  Nor SHALL
be, neither!  List to what I say--follow every word--I am going to
bring that morning back again, every hap just as it happened.  We
talked--I told you of my sisters, Nan and Bet--ah, yes, you
remember that; and about mine old grandam--and the rough games of
the lads of Offal Court--yes, you remember these things also; very
well, follow me still, you shall recall everything.  You gave me
food and drink, and did with princely courtesy send away the
servants, so that my low breeding might not shame me before them--
ah, yes, this also you remember."

As Tom checked off his details, and the other boy nodded his head
in recognition of them, the great audience and the officials
stared in puzzled wonderment; the tale sounded like true history,
yet how could this impossible conjunction between a prince and a
beggar-boy have come about?  Never was a company of people so
perplexed, so interested, and so stupefied, before.

"For a jest, my prince, we did exchange garments.  Then we stood
before a mirror; and so alike were we that both said it seemed as
if there had been no change made--yes, you remember that.  Then
you noticed that the soldier had hurt my hand--look! here it is, I
cannot yet even write with it, the fingers are so stiff.  At this
your Highness sprang up, vowing vengeance upon that soldier, and
ran towards the door--you passed a table--that thing you call the
Seal lay on that table--you snatched it up and looked eagerly
about, as if for a place to hide it--your eye caught sight of--"

"There, 'tis sufficient!--and the good God be thanked!" exclaimed
the ragged claimant, in a mighty excitement.  "Go, my good St.
John--in an arm-piece of the Milanese armour that hangs on the
wall, thou'lt find the Seal!"

"Right, my King! right!" cried Tom Canty; "NOW the sceptre of
England is thine own; and it were better for him that would
dispute it that he had been born dumb!  Go, my Lord St. John, give
thy feet wings!"

The whole assemblage was on its feet now, and well-nigh out of its
mind with uneasiness, apprehension, and consuming excitement.  On
the floor and on the platform a deafening buzz of frantic
conversation burst forth, and for some time nobody knew anything
or heard anything or was interested in anything but what his
neighbour was shouting into his ear, or he was shouting into his
neighbour's ear.  Time--nobody knew how much of it--swept by
unheeded and unnoted.  At last a sudden hush fell upon the house,
and in the same moment St. John appeared upon the platform, and
held the Great Seal aloft in his hand.  Then such a shout went up-
-

"Long live the true King!"

For five minutes the air quaked with shouts and the crash of
musical instruments, and was white with a storm of waving
handkerchiefs; and through it all a ragged lad, the most
conspicuous figure in England, stood, flushed and happy and proud,
in the centre of the spacious platform, with the great vassals of
the kingdom kneeling around him.

Then all rose, and Tom Canty cried out--

"Now, O my King, take these regal garments back, and give poor
Tom, thy servant, his shreds and remnants again."

The Lord Protector spoke up--

"Let the small varlet be stripped and flung into the Tower."

But the new King, the true King, said--

"I will not have it so.  But for him I had not got my crown again-
-none shall lay a hand upon him to harm him.  And as for thee, my
good uncle, my Lord Protector, this conduct of thine is not
grateful toward this poor lad, for I hear he hath made thee a
duke"--the Protector blushed--"yet he was not a king; wherefore
what is thy fine title worth now?  To-morrow you shall sue to me,
THROUGH HIM, for its confirmation, else no duke, but a simple
earl, shalt thou remain."

Under this rebuke, his Grace the Duke of Somerset retired a little
from the front for the moment.  The King turned to Tom, and said
kindly--"My poor boy, how was it that you could remember where I
hid the Seal when I could not remember it myself?"

"Ah, my King, that was easy, since I used it divers days."

"Used it--yet could not explain where it was?"

"I did not know it was THAT they wanted.  They did not describe
it, your Majesty."

"Then how used you it?"

The red blood began to steal up into Tom's cheeks, and he dropped
his eyes and was silent.

"Speak up, good lad, and fear nothing," said the King.  "How used
you the Great Seal of England?"

Tom stammered a moment, in a pathetic confusion, then got it out--

"To crack nuts with!"

Poor child, the avalanche of laughter that greeted this nearly
swept him off his feet.  But if a doubt remained in any mind that
Tom Canty was not the King of England and familiar with the august
appurtenances of royalty, this reply disposed of it utterly.

Meantime the sumptuous robe of state had been removed from Tom's
shoulders to the King's, whose rags were effectually hidden from
sight under it.  Then the coronation ceremonies were resumed; the
true King was anointed and the crown set upon his head, whilst
cannon thundered the news to the city, and all London seemed to
rock with applause.



Chapter XXXIII. Edward as King.

Miles Hendon was picturesque enough before he got into the riot on
London Bridge--he was more so when he got out of it.  He had but
little money when he got in, none at all when he got out.  The
pickpockets had stripped him of his last farthing.

But no matter, so he found his boy.  Being a soldier, he did not
go at his task in a random way, but set to work, first of all, to
arrange his campaign.

What would the boy naturally do?  Where would he naturally go?
Well--argued Miles--he would naturally go to his former haunts,
for that is the instinct of unsound minds, when homeless and
forsaken, as well as of sound ones.  Whereabouts were his former
haunts?  His rags, taken together with the low villain who seemed
to know him and who even claimed to be his father, indicated that
his home was in one or another of the poorest and meanest
districts of London.  Would the search for him be difficult, or
long?  No, it was likely to be easy and brief.  He would not hunt
for the boy, he would hunt for a crowd; in the centre of a big
crowd or a little one, sooner or later, he should find his poor
little friend, sure; and the mangy mob would be entertaining
itself with pestering and aggravating the boy, who would be
proclaiming himself King, as usual.  Then Miles Hendon would
cripple some of those people, and carry off his little ward, and
comfort and cheer him with loving words, and the two would never
be separated any more.

So Miles started on his quest.  Hour after hour he tramped through
back alleys and squalid streets, seeking groups and crowds, and
finding no end of them, but never any sign of the boy.  This
greatly surprised him, but did not discourage him.  To his notion,
there was nothing the matter with his plan of campaign; the only
miscalculation about it was that the campaign was becoming a
lengthy one, whereas he had expected it to be short.

When daylight arrived, at last, he had made many a mile, and
canvassed many a crowd, but the only result was that he was
tolerably tired, rather hungry and very sleepy.  He wanted some
breakfast, but there was no way to get it.  To beg for it did not
occur to him; as to pawning his sword, he would as soon have
thought of parting with his honour; he could spare some of his
clothes--yes, but one could as easily find a customer for a
disease as for such clothes.

At noon he was still tramping--among the rabble which followed
after the royal procession, now; for he argued that this regal
display would attract his little lunatic powerfully.  He followed
the pageant through all its devious windings about London, and all
the way to Westminster and the Abbey.  He drifted here and there
amongst the multitudes that were massed in the vicinity for a
weary long time, baffled and perplexed, and finally wandered off,
thinking, and trying to contrive some way to better his plan of
campaign.  By-and-by, when he came to himself out of his musings,
he discovered that the town was far behind him and that the day
was growing old.  He was near the river, and in the country; it
was a region of fine rural seats--not the sort of district to
welcome clothes like his.

It was not at all cold; so he stretched himself on the ground in
the lee of a hedge to rest and think.  Drowsiness presently began
to settle upon his senses; the faint and far-off boom of cannon
was wafted to his ear, and he said to himself, "The new King is
crowned," and straightway fell asleep.  He had not slept or
rested, before, for more than thirty hours.  He did not wake again
until near the middle of the next morning.

He got up, lame, stiff, and half famished, washed himself in the
river, stayed his stomach with a pint or two of water, and trudged
off toward Westminster, grumbling at himself for having wasted so
much time.  Hunger helped him to a new plan, now; he would try to
get speech with old Sir Humphrey Marlow and borrow a few marks,
and--but that was enough of a plan for the present; it would be
time enough to enlarge it when this first stage should be
accomplished.

Toward eleven o'clock he approached the palace; and although a
host of showy people were about him, moving in the same direction,
he was not inconspicuous--his costume took care of that.  He
watched these people's faces narrowly, hoping to find a charitable
one whose possessor might be willing to carry his name to the old
lieutenant--as to trying to get into the palace himself, that was
simply out of the question.

Presently our whipping-boy passed him, then wheeled about and
scanned his figure well, saying to himself, "An' that is not the
very vagabond his Majesty is in such a worry about, then am I an
ass--though belike I was that before.  He answereth the
description to a rag--that God should make two such would be to
cheapen miracles by wasteful repetition.  I would I could contrive
an excuse to speak with him."

Miles Hendon saved him the trouble; for he turned about, then, as
a man generally will when somebody mesmerises him by gazing hard
at him from behind; and observing a strong interest in the boy's
eyes, he stepped toward him and said--

"You have just come out from the palace; do you belong there?"

"Yes, your worship."

"Know you Sir Humphrey Marlow?"

The boy started, and said to himself, "Lord! mine old departed
father!"  Then he answered aloud, "Right well, your worship."

"Good--is he within?"

"Yes," said the boy; and added, to himself, "within his grave."

"Might I crave your favour to carry my name to him, and say I beg
to say a word in his ear?"

"I will despatch the business right willingly, fair sir."

"Then say Miles Hendon, son of Sir Richard, is here without--I
shall be greatly bounden to you, my good lad."

The boy looked disappointed.  "The King did not name him so," he
said to himself; "but it mattereth not, this is his twin brother,
and can give his Majesty news of t'other Sir-Odds-and-Ends, I
warrant."  So he said to Miles, "Step in there a moment, good sir,
and wait till I bring you word."

Hendon retired to the place indicated--it was a recess sunk in the
palace wall, with a stone bench in it--a shelter for sentinels in
bad weather.  He had hardly seated himself when some halberdiers,
in charge of an officer, passed by.  The officer saw him, halted
his men, and commanded Hendon to come forth.  He obeyed, and was
promptly arrested as a suspicious character prowling within the
precincts of the palace.  Things began to look ugly.  Poor Miles
was going to explain, but the officer roughly silenced him, and
ordered his men to disarm him and search him.

"God of his mercy grant that they find somewhat," said poor Miles;
"I have searched enow, and failed, yet is my need greater than
theirs."

Nothing was found but a document.  The officer tore it open, and
Hendon smiled when he recognised the 'pot-hooks' made by his lost
little friend that black day at Hendon Hall.  The officer's face
grew dark as he read the English paragraph, and Miles blenched to
the opposite colour as he listened.

"Another new claimant of the Crown!" cried the officer.  "Verily
they breed like rabbits, to-day.  Seize the rascal, men, and see
ye keep him fast whilst I convey this precious paper within and
send it to the King."

He hurried away, leaving the prisoner in the grip of the
halberdiers.

"Now is my evil luck ended at last," muttered Hendon, "for I shall
dangle at a rope's end for a certainty, by reason of that bit of
writing.  And what will become of my poor lad!--ah, only the good
God knoweth."

By-and-by he saw the officer coming again, in a great hurry; so he
plucked his courage together, purposing to meet his trouble as
became a man.  The officer ordered the men to loose the prisoner
and return his sword to him; then bowed respectfully, and said--

"Please you, sir, to follow me."

Hendon followed, saying to himself, "An' I were not travelling to
death and judgment, and so must needs economise in sin, I would
throttle this knave for his mock courtesy."

The two traversed a populous court, and arrived at the grand
entrance of the palace, where the officer, with another bow,
delivered Hendon into the hands of a gorgeous official, who
received him with profound respect and led him forward through a
great hall, lined on both sides with rows of splendid flunkeys
(who made reverential obeisance as the two passed along, but fell
into death-throes of silent laughter at our stately scarecrow the
moment his back was turned), and up a broad staircase, among
flocks of fine folk, and finally conducted him into a vast room,
clove a passage for him through the assembled nobility of England,
then made a bow, reminded him to take his hat off, and left him
standing in the middle of the room, a mark for all eyes, for
plenty of indignant frowns, and for a sufficiency of amused and
derisive smiles.

Miles Hendon was entirely bewildered.  There sat the young King,
under a canopy of state, five steps away, with his head bent down
and aside, speaking with a sort of human bird of paradise--a duke,
maybe.  Hendon observed to himself that it was hard enough to be
sentenced to death in the full vigour of life, without having this
peculiarly public humiliation added.  He wished the King would
hurry about it--some of the gaudy people near by were becoming
pretty offensive.  At this moment the King raised his head
slightly, and Hendon caught a good view of his face.  The sight
nearly took his breath away!--He stood gazing at the fair young
face like one transfixed; then presently ejaculated--

"Lo, the Lord of the Kingdom of Dreams and Shadows on his throne!"

He muttered some broken sentences, still gazing and marvelling;
then turned his eyes around and about, scanning the gorgeous
throng and the splendid saloon, murmuring, "But these are REAL--
verily these are REAL--surely it is not a dream."

He stared at the King again--and thought, "IS it a dream . . . or
IS he the veritable Sovereign of England, and not the friendless
poor Tom o' Bedlam I took him for--who shall solve me this
riddle?"

A sudden idea flashed in his eye, and he strode to the wall,
gathered up a chair, brought it back, planted it on the floor, and
sat down in it!

A buzz of indignation broke out, a rough hand was laid upon him
and a voice exclaimed--

"Up, thou mannerless clown! would'st sit in the presence of the
King?"

The disturbance attracted his Majesty's attention, who stretched
forth his hand and cried out--

"Touch him not, it is his right!"

The throng fell back, stupefied.  The King went on--

"Learn ye all, ladies, lords, and gentlemen, that this is my
trusty and well-beloved servant, Miles Hendon, who interposed his
good sword and saved his prince from bodily harm and possible
death--and for this he is a knight, by the King's voice.  Also
learn, that for a higher service, in that he saved his sovereign
stripes and shame, taking these upon himself, he is a peer of
England, Earl of Kent, and shall have gold and lands meet for the
dignity.  More--the privilege which he hath just exercised is his
by royal grant; for we have ordained that the chiefs of his line
shall have and hold the right to sit in the presence of the
Majesty of England henceforth, age after age, so long as the crown
shall endure.  Molest him not."

Two persons, who, through delay, had only arrived from the country
during this morning, and had now been in this room only five
minutes, stood listening to these words and looking at the King,
then at the scarecrow, then at the King again, in a sort of torpid
bewilderment.  These were Sir Hugh and the Lady Edith.  But the
new Earl did not see them.  He was still staring at the monarch,
in a dazed way, and muttering--

"Oh, body o' me!  THIS my pauper!  This my lunatic!  This is he
whom _I_ would show what grandeur was, in my house of seventy
rooms and seven-and-twenty servants!  This is he who had never
known aught but rags for raiment, kicks for comfort, and offal for
diet!  This is he whom _I_ adopted and would make respectable!
Would God I had a bag to hide my head in!"

Then his manners suddenly came back to him, and he dropped upon
his knees, with his hands between the King's, and swore allegiance
and did homage for his lands and titles.  Then he rose and stood
respectfully aside, a mark still for all eyes--and much envy, too.

Now the King discovered Sir Hugh, and spoke out with wrathful
voice and kindling eye--

"Strip this robber of his false show and stolen estates, and put
him under lock and key till I have need of him."

The late Sir Hugh was led away.

There was a stir at the other end of the room, now; the assemblage
fell apart, and Tom Canty, quaintly but richly clothed, marched
down, between these living walls, preceded by an usher.  He knelt
before the King, who said--

"I have learned the story of these past few weeks, and am well
pleased with thee.  Thou hast governed the realm with right royal
gentleness and mercy.  Thou hast found thy mother and thy sisters
again?  Good; they shall be cared for--and thy father shall hang,
if thou desire it and the law consent.  Know, all ye that hear my
voice, that from this day, they that abide in the shelter of
Christ's Hospital and share the King's bounty shall have their
minds and hearts fed, as well as their baser parts; and this boy
shall dwell there, and hold the chief place in its honourable body
of governors, during life.  And for that he hath been a king, it
is meet that other than common observance shall be his due;
wherefore note this his dress of state, for by it he shall be
known, and none shall copy it; and wheresoever he shall come, it
shall remind the people that he hath been royal, in his time, and
none shall deny him his due of reverence or fail to give him
salutation.  He hath the throne's protection, he hath the crown's
support, he shall be known and called by the honourable title of
the King's Ward."

The proud and happy Tom Canty rose and kissed the King's hand, and
was conducted from the presence.  He did not waste any time, but
flew to his mother, to tell her and Nan and Bet all about it and
get them to help him enjoy the great news. {1}



Conclusion. Justice and retribution.

When the mysteries were all cleared up, it came out, by confession
of Hugh Hendon, that his wife had repudiated Miles by his command,
that day at Hendon Hall--a command assisted and supported by the
perfectly trustworthy promise that if she did not deny that he was
Miles Hendon, and stand firmly to it, he would have her life;
whereupon she said, "Take it!"--she did not value it--and she
would not repudiate Miles; then the husband said he would spare
her life but have Miles assassinated!  This was a different
matter; so she gave her word and kept it.

Hugh was not prosecuted for his threats or for stealing his
brother's estates and title, because the wife and brother would
not testify against him--and the former would not have been
allowed to do it, even if she had wanted to.  Hugh deserted his
wife and went over to the continent, where he presently died; and
by-and-by the Earl of Kent married his relict.  There were grand
times and rejoicings at Hendon village when the couple paid their
first visit to the Hall.

Tom Canty's father was never heard of again.

The King sought out the farmer who had been branded and sold as a
slave, and reclaimed him from his evil life with the Ruffler's
gang, and put him in the way of a comfortable livelihood.

He also took that old lawyer out of prison and remitted his fine.
He provided good homes for the daughters of the two Baptist women
whom he saw burned at the stake, and roundly punished the official
who laid the undeserved stripes upon Miles Hendon's back.

He saved from the gallows the boy who had captured the stray
falcon, and also the woman who had stolen a remnant of cloth from
a weaver; but he was too late to save the man who had been
convicted of killing a deer in the royal forest.

He showed favour to the justice who had pitied him when he was
supposed to have stolen a pig, and he had the gratification of
seeing him grow in the public esteem and become a great and
honoured man.

As long as the King lived he was fond of telling the story of his
adventures, all through, from the hour that the sentinel cuffed
him away from the palace gate till the final midnight when he
deftly mixed himself into a gang of hurrying workmen and so
slipped into the Abbey and climbed up and hid himself in the
Confessor's tomb, and then slept so long, next day, that he came
within one of missing the Coronation altogether.  He said that the
frequent rehearsing of the precious lesson kept him strong in his
purpose to make its teachings yield benefits to his people; and
so, whilst his life was spared he should continue to tell the
story, and thus keep its sorrowful spectacles fresh in his memory
and the springs of pity replenished in his heart.

Miles Hendon and Tom Canty were favourites of the King, all
through his brief reign, and his sincere mourners when he died.
The good Earl of Kent had too much sense to abuse his peculiar
privilege; but he exercised it twice after the instance we have
seen of it before he was called from this world--once at the
accession of Queen Mary, and once at the accession of Queen
Elizabeth.  A descendant of his exercised it at the accession of
James I.  Before this one's son chose to use the privilege, near a
quarter of a century had elapsed, and the 'privilege of the Kents'
had faded out of most people's memories; so, when the Kent of that
day appeared before Charles I. and his court and sat down in the
sovereign's presence to assert and perpetuate the right of his
house, there was a fine stir indeed!  But the matter was soon
explained, and the right confirmed.  The last Earl of the line
fell in the wars of the Commonwealth fighting for the King, and
the odd privilege ended with him.

Tom Canty lived to be a very old man, a handsome, white-haired old
fellow, of grave and benignant aspect.  As long as he lasted he
was honoured; and he was also reverenced, for his striking and
peculiar costume kept the people reminded that 'in his time he had
been royal;' so, wherever he appeared the crowd fell apart, making
way for him, and whispering, one to another, "Doff thy hat, it is
the King's Ward!"--and so they saluted, and got his kindly smile
in return--and they valued it, too, for his was an honourable
history.

Yes, King Edward VI. lived only a few years, poor boy, but he
lived them worthily.  More than once, when some great dignitary,
some gilded vassal of the crown, made argument against his
leniency, and urged that some law which he was bent upon amending
was gentle enough for its purpose, and wrought no suffering or
oppression which any one need mightily mind, the young King turned
the mournful eloquence of his great compassionate eyes upon him
and answered--

"What dost THOU know of suffering and oppression?  I and my people
know, but not thou."

The reign of Edward VI. was a singularly merciful one for those
harsh times.  Now that we are taking leave of him, let us try to
keep this in our minds, to his credit.



FOOTNOTES AND TWAIN'S NOTES



{1}  For Mark Twain's note see below under the relevant chapter
heading.

{2}  He refers to the order of baronets, or baronettes; the
barones minores, as distinct from the parliamentary barons--not,
it need hardly be said, to the baronets of later creation.

{3}  The lords of Kingsale, descendants of De Courcy, still enjoy
this curious privilege.

{4}  Hume.

{5}  Ib.

{6}  Leigh Hunt's 'The Town,' p.408, quotation from an early
tourist.

{7}  Canting terms for various kinds of thieves, beggars and
vagabonds, and their female companions.

{8}  From 'The English Rogue.'  London, 1665.

{9}  Hume's England.

{10}  See Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.
11.

NOTE 1, Chapter IV. Christ's Hospital Costume.

It is most reasonable to regard the dress as copied from the
costume of the citizens of London of that period, when long blue
coats were the common habit of apprentices and serving-men, and
yellow stockings were generally worn; the coat fits closely to the
body, but has loose sleeves, and beneath is worn a sleeveless
yellow under-coat; around the waist is a red leathern girdle; a
clerical band around the neck, and a small flat black cap, about
the size of a saucer, completes the costume.--Timbs' Curiosities
of London.

NOTE 2, Chapter IV.

It appears that Christ's Hospital was not originally founded as a
SCHOOL; its object was to rescue children from the streets, to
shelter, feed, clothe them.
--Timbs' Curiosities of London.

NOTE 3, Chapter V. The Duke of Norfolk's Condemnation commanded.

The King was now approaching fast towards his end; and fearing
lest Norfolk should escape him, he sent a message to the Commons,
by which he desired them to hasten the Bill, on pretence that
Norfolk enjoyed the dignity of Earl Marshal, and it was necessary
to appoint another, who might officiate at the ensuing ceremony of
installing his son Prince of Wales.--Hume's History of England,
vol. iii. p. 307.

NOTE 4, Chapter VII.

It was not till the end of this reign (Henry VIII.) that any
salads, carrots, turnips, or other edible roots were produced in
England.  The little of these vegetables that was used was
formerly imported from Holland and Flanders.  Queen Catherine,
when she wanted a salad, was obliged to despatch a messenger
thither on purpose.--Hume's History of England, vol. iii. p. 314.

NOTE 5, Chapter VIII. Attainder of Norfolk.

The House of Peers, without examining the prisoner, without trial
or evidence, passed a Bill of Attainder against him and sent it
down to the Commons . . . The obsequious Commons obeyed his (the
King's) directions; and the King, having affixed the Royal assent
to the Bill by commissioners, issued orders for the execution of
Norfolk on the morning of January 29 (the next day).--Hume's
History of England, vol iii. p 306.

NOTE 6, Chapter X. The Loving-cup.

The loving-cup, and the peculiar ceremonies observed in drinking
from it, are older than English history.  It is thought that both
are Danish importations.  As far back as knowledge goes, the
loving-cup has always been drunk at English banquets.  Tradition
explains the ceremonies in this way.  In the rude ancient times it
was deemed a wise precaution to have both hands of both drinkers
employed, lest while the pledger pledged his love and fidelity to
the pledgee, the pledgee take that opportunity to slip a dirk into
him!

NOTE 7, Chapter XI. The Duke of Norfolk's narrow Escape.

Had Henry VIII. survived a few hours longer, his order for the
duke's execution would have been carried into effect. 'But news
being carried to the Tower that the King himself had expired that
night, the lieutenant deferred obeying the warrant; and it was not
thought advisable by the Council to begin a new reign by the death
of the greatest nobleman in the kingdom, who had been condemned by
a sentence so unjust and tyrannical.'--Hume's History of England,
vol. iii, p. 307.

NOTE 8, Chapter XIV. The Whipping-boy.

James I. and Charles II. had whipping-boys, when they were little
fellows, to take their punishment for them when they fell short in
their lessons; so I have ventured to furnish my small prince with
one, for my own purposes.

NOTES to Chapter XV.

Character of Hertford.

The young King discovered an extreme attachment to his uncle, who
was, in the main, a man of moderation and probity.--Hume's History
of England, vol. iii.p324.

But if he (the Protector) gave offence by assuming too much state,
he deserves great praise on account of the laws passed this
session, by which the rigour of former statutes was much
mitigated, and some security given to the freedom of the
constitution.  All laws were repealed which extended the crime of
treason beyond the statute of the twenty-fifth of Edward III.; all
laws enacted during the late reign extending the crime of felony;
all the former laws against Lollardy or heresy, together with the
statute of the Six Articles.  None were to be accused for words,
but within a month after they were spoken.  By these repeals
several of the most rigorous laws that ever had passed in England
were annulled; and some dawn, both of civil and religious liberty,
began to appear to the people.  A repeal also passed of that law,
the destruction of all laws, by which the King's proclamation was
made of equal force with a statute.--Ibid. vol. iii. p. 339.

Boiling to Death.

In the reign of Henry VIII. poisoners were, by Act of Parliament,
condemned to be BOILED TO DEATH.  This Act was repealed in the
following reign.

In Germany, even in the seventeenth century, this horrible
punishment was inflicted on coiners and counterfeiters.  Taylor,
the Water Poet, describes an execution he witnessed in Hamburg in
1616.  The judgment pronounced against a coiner of false money was
that he should 'BE BOILED TO DEATH IN OIL; not thrown into the
vessel at once, but with a pulley or rope to be hanged under the
armpits, and then let down into the oil BY DEGREES; first the
feet, and next the legs, and so to boil his flesh from his bones
alive.'--Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.
13.

The Famous Stocking Case.

A woman and her daughter, NINE YEARS OLD, were hanged in
Huntingdon for selling their souls to the devil, and raising a
storm by pulling off their stockings!--Dr. J. Hammond Trumbull's
Blue Laws, True and False, p. 20.

NOTE 10, Chapter XVII. Enslaving.

So young a King and so ignorant a peasant were likely to make
mistakes; and this is an instance in point.  This peasant was
suffering from this law BY ANTICIPATION; the King was venting his
indignation against a law which was not yet in existence; for this
hideous statute was to have birth in this little King's OWN REIGN.
However, we know, from the humanity of his character, that it
could never have been suggested by him.

NOTES to Chapter XXIII. Death for Trifling Larcenies.

When Connecticut and New Haven were framing their first codes,
larceny above the value of twelve pence was a capital crime in
England--as it had been since the time of Henry I.--Dr. J. Hammond
Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p. 17.

The curious old book called The English Rogue makes the limit
thirteen pence ha'penny:  death being the portion of any who steal
a thing 'above the value of thirteen pence ha'penny.'

NOTES to Chapter XXVII.

From many descriptions of larceny the law expressly took away the
benefit of clergy:  to steal a horse, or a HAWK, or woollen cloth
from the weaver, was a hanging matter.  So it was to kill a deer
from the King's forest, or to export sheep from the kingdom.--Dr.
J. Hammond Trumbull's Blue Laws, True and False, p.13.

William Prynne, a learned barrister, was sentenced (long after
Edward VI.'s time) to lose both his ears in the pillory, to
degradation from the bar, a fine of 3,000 pounds, and imprisonment
for life.  Three years afterwards he gave new offence to Laud by
publishing a pamphlet against the hierarchy.  He was again
prosecuted, and was sentenced to lose WHAT REMAINED OF HIS EARS,
to pay a fine of 5,000 pounds, to be BRANDED ON BOTH HIS CHEEKS
with the letters S. L. (for Seditious Libeller), and to remain in
prison for life.  The severity of this sentence was equalled by
the savage rigour of its execution.--Ibid. p. 12.

NOTES to Chapter XXXIII.

Christ's Hospital, or Bluecoat School, 'the noblest institution in
the world.'

The ground on which the Priory of the Grey Friars stood was
conferred by Henry VIII. on the Corporation of London (who caused
the institution there of a home for poor boys and girls).
Subsequently, Edward VI. caused the old Priory to be properly
repaired, and founded within it that noble establishment called
the Bluecoat School, or Christ's Hospital, for the EDUCATION and
maintenance of orphans and the children of indigent persons . . .
Edward would not let him (Bishop Ridley) depart till the letter
was written (to the Lord Mayor), and then charged him to deliver
it himself, and signify his special request and commandment that
no time might be lost in proposing what was convenient, and
apprising him of the proceedings.  The work was zealously
undertaken, Ridley himself engaging in it; and the result was the
founding of Christ's Hospital for the education of poor children.
(The King endowed several other charities at the same time.)
"Lord God," said he, "I yield Thee most hearty thanks that Thou
hast given me life thus long to finish this work to the glory of
Thy name!"  That innocent and most exemplary life was drawing
rapidly to its close, and in a few days he rendered up his spirit
to his Creator, praying God to defend the realm from Papistry.--J.
Heneage Jesse's London:  its Celebrated Characters and Places.

In the Great Hall hangs a large picture of King Edward VI. seated
on his throne, in a scarlet and ermined robe, holding the sceptre
in his left hand, and presenting with the other the Charter to the
kneeling Lord Mayor.  By his side stands the Chancellor, holding
the seals, and next to him are other officers of state.  Bishop
Ridley kneels before him with uplifted hands, as if supplicating a
blessing on the event; whilst the Aldermen, etc., with the Lord
Mayor, kneel on both sides, occupying the middle ground of the
picture; and lastly, in front, are a double row of boys on one
side and girls on the other, from the master and matron down to
the boy and girl who have stepped forward from their respective
rows, and kneel with raised hands before the King.--Timbs'
Curiosities of London, p. 98.

Christ's Hospital, by ancient custom, possesses the privilege of
addressing the Sovereign on the occasion of his or her coming into
the City to partake of the hospitality of the Corporation of
London.--Ibid.

The Dining Hall, with its lobby and organ-gallery, occupies the
entire storey, which is 187 feet long, 51 feet wide, and 47 feet
high; it is lit by nine large windows, filled with stained glass
on the south side; and is, next to Westminster Hall, the noblest
room in the metropolis.  Here the boys, now about 800 in number,
dine; and here are held the 'Suppings in Public,' to which
visitors are admitted by tickets issued by the Treasurer and by
the Governors of Christ's Hospital.  The tables are laid with
cheese in wooden bowls, beer in wooden piggins, poured from
leathern jacks, and bread brought in large baskets.  The official
company enter; the Lord Mayor, or President, takes his seat in a
state chair made of oak from St. Catherine's Church, by the Tower;
a hymn is sung, accompanied by the organ; a 'Grecian,' or head
boy, reads the prayers from the pulpit, silence being enforced by
three drops of a wooden hammer.  After prayer the supper
commences, and the visitors walk between the tables.  At its close
the 'trade-boys' take up the baskets, bowls, jacks, piggins, and
candlesticks, and pass in procession, the bowing to the Governors
being curiously formal.  This spectacle was witnessed by Queen
Victoria and Prince Albert in 1845.

Among the more eminent Bluecoat boys are Joshua Barnes, editor of
Anacreon and Euripides; Jeremiah Markland, the eminent critic,
particularly in Greek Literature; Camden, the antiquary; Bishop
Stillingfleet; Samuel Richardson, the novelist; Thomas Mitchell,
the translator of Aristophanes; Thomas Barnes, many years editor
of the London Times; Coleridge, Charles Lamb, and Leigh Hunt.

No boy is admitted before he is seven years old, or after he is
nine; and no boy can remain in the school after he is fifteen,
King's boys and 'Grecians' alone excepted.  There are about 500
Governors, at the head of whom are the Sovereign and the Prince of
Wales.  The qualification for a Governor is payment of 500
pounds.--Ibid.


GENERAL NOTE.


One hears much about the 'hideous Blue Laws of Connecticut,' and
is accustomed to shudder piously when they are mentioned.  There
are people in America--and even in England!--who imagine that they
were a very monument of malignity, pitilessness, and inhumanity;
whereas in reality they were about the first SWEEPING DEPARTURE
FROM JUDICIAL ATROCITY which the 'civilised' world had seen.  This
humane and kindly Blue Law Code, of two hundred and forty years
ago, stands all by itself, with ages of bloody law on the further
side of it, and a century and three-quarters of bloody English law
on THIS side of it.

There has never been a time--under the Blue Laws or any other--
when above FOURTEEN crimes were punishable by death in
Connecticut.  But in England, within the memory of men who are
still hale in body and mind, TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THREE crimes
were punishable by death! {10}  These facts are worth knowing--and
worth thinking about, too.





End of Project Gutenberg Etext The Prince and the Pauper, by Mark Twain






                         LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI

                              BY MARK TWAIN



                        THE 'BODY OF THE NATION'

BUT the basin of the Mississippi is the BODY OF THE NATION.
All the other parts are but members, important in themselves,
yet more important in their relations to this.  Exclusive of
the Lake basin and of 300,000 square miles in Texas and New Mexico,
which in many aspects form a part of it, this basin contains
about 1,250,000 square miles.  In extent it is the second great
valley of the world, being exceeded only by that of the Amazon.
The valley of the frozen Obi approaches it in extent;
that of La Plata comes next in space, and probably in
habitable capacity, having about eight-ninths of its area;
then comes that of the Yenisei, with about seven-ninths;
the Lena, Amoor, Hoang-ho, Yang-tse-kiang, and Nile, five-ninths;
the Ganges, less than one-half; the Indus, less than one-third;
the Euphrates, one-fifth; the Rhine, one-fifteenth. It exceeds in
extent the whole of Europe, exclusive of Russia, Norway, and Sweden.
IT WOULD CONTAIN AUSTRIA FOUR TIMES, GERMANY OR SPAIN FIVE TIMES,
FRANCE SIX TIMES, THE BRITISH ISLANDS OR ITALY TEN TIMES.
Conceptions formed from the river-basins of Western Europe
are rudely shocked when we consider the extent of the valley
of the Mississippi; nor are those formed from the sterile basins
of the great rivers of Siberia, the lofty plateaus of Central Asia,
or the mighty sweep of the swampy Amazon more adequate.
Latitude, elevation, and rainfall all combine to render every part
of the Mississippi Valley capable of supporting a dense population.
AS A DWELLING-PLACE FOR CIVILIZED MAN IT IS BY FAR THE FIRST UPON
OUR GLOBE.

EDITOR'S TABLE, HARPER'S MAGAZINE, FEBRUARY 1863



                                Chapter 1
                        The River and Its History

THE Mississippi is well worth reading about.  It is not a
commonplace river, but on the contrary is in all ways remarkable.
Considering the Missouri its main branch, it is the longest
river in the world--four thousand three hundred miles.
It seems safe to say that it is also the crookedest river in the world,
since in one part of its journey it uses up one thousand three hundred
miles to cover the same ground that the crow would fly over in six
hundred and seventy-five. It discharges three times as much water
as the St. Lawrence, twenty-five times as much as the Rhine,
and three hundred and thirty-eight times as much as the Thames.
No other river has so vast a drainage-basin:  it draws its water
supply from twenty-eight States and Territories; from Delaware,
on the Atlantic seaboard, and from all the country between that and Idaho
on the Pacific slope--a spread of forty-five degrees of longitude.
The Mississippi receives and carries to the Gulf water from
fifty-four subordinate rivers that are navigable by steamboats,
and from some hundreds that are navigable by flats and keels.
The area of its drainage-basin is as great as the combined areas
of England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, France, Spain, Portugal, Germany,
Austria, Italy, and Turkey; and almost all this wide region is fertile;
the Mississippi valley, proper, is exceptionally so.

It is a remarkable river in this:  that instead of widening toward its mouth,
it grows narrower; grows narrower and deeper.  From the junction of the Ohio
to a point half way down to the sea, the width averages a mile in high water:
thence to the sea the width steadily diminishes, until, at the 'Passes,' above
the mouth, it is but little over half a mile.  At the junction of the Ohio
the Mississippi's depth is eighty-seven feet; the depth increases gradually,
reaching one hundred and twenty-nine just above the mouth.

The difference in rise and fall is also remarkable--not in the upper,
but in the lower river.  The rise is tolerably uniform down to Natchez
(three hundred and sixty miles above the mouth)--about fifty feet.
But at Bayou La Fourche the river rises only twenty-four feet;
at New Orleans only fifteen, and just above the mouth only two
and one half.

An article in the New Orleans 'Times-Democrat,' based upon reports
of able engineers, states that the river annually empties four hundred
and six million tons of mud into the Gulf of Mexico--which brings to mind
Captain Marryat's rude name for the Mississippi--'the Great Sewer.'
This mud, solidified, would make a mass a mile square and two hundred
and forty-one feet high.

The mud deposit gradually extends the land--but only gradually;
it has extended it not quite a third of a mile in the two hundred
years which have elapsed since the river took its place in history.
The belief of the scientific people is, that the mouth used to be
at Baton Rouge, where the hills cease, and that the two hundred
miles of land between there and the Gulf was built by the river.
This gives us the age of that piece of country, without any
trouble at all--one hundred and twenty thousand years.
Yet it is much the youthfullest batch of country that lies
around there anywhere.

The Mississippi is remarkable in still another way--
its disposition to make prodigious jumps by cutting through narrow
necks of land, and thus straightening and shortening itself.
More than once it has shortened itself thirty miles at
a single jump!  These cut-offs have had curious effects:
they have thrown several river towns out into the rural districts,
and built up sand bars and forests in front of them.
The town of Delta used to be three miles below Vicksburg:
a recent cutoff has radically changed the position, and Delta is now TWO
MILES ABOVE Vicksburg.

Both of these river towns have been retired to the country by that
cut-off. A cut-off plays havoc with boundary lines and jurisdictions:
for instance, a man is living in the State of Mississippi to-day,
a cut-off occurs to-night, and to-morrow the man finds himself
and his land over on the other side of the river, within the
boundaries and subject to the laws of the State of Louisiana!
Such a thing, happening in the upper river in the old times,
could have transferred a slave from Missouri to Illinois and made
a free man of him.

The Mississippi does not alter its locality by cut-offs alone:
it is always changing its habitat BODILY--is always moving bodily SIDEWISE.
At Hard Times, La., the river is two miles west of the region it
used to occupy.  As a result, the original SITE of that settlement
is not now in Louisiana at all, but on the other side of the river,
in the State of Mississippi.  NEARLY THE WHOLE OF THAT ONE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED MILES OF OLD MISSISSIPPI RIVER WHICH LA SALLE FLOATED DOWN
IN HIS CANOES, TWO HUNDRED YEARS AGO, IS GOOD SOLID DRY GROUND NOW.
The river lies to the right of it, in places, and to the left of it
in other places.

Although the Mississippi's mud builds land but slowly, down at
the mouth, where the Gulfs billows interfere with its work,
it builds fast enough in better protected regions higher up:
for instance, Prophet's Island contained one thousand five
hundred acres of land thirty years ago; since then the river has
added seven hundred acres to it.

But enough of these examples of the mighty stream's eccentricities
for the present--I will give a few more of them further along
in the book.

Let us drop the Mississippi's physical history, and say a word
about its historical history--so to speak.  We can glance briefly
at its slumbrous first epoch in a couple of short chapters;
at its second and wider-awake epoch in a couple more; at its
flushest and widest-awake epoch in a good many succeeding chapters;
and then talk about its comparatively tranquil present epoch
in what shall be left of the book.

The world and the books are so accustomed to use, and over-use,
the word 'new' in connection with our country, that we early get and
permanently retain the impression that there is nothing old about it.
We do of course know that there are several comparatively old dates in
American history, but the mere figures convey to our minds no just idea,
no distinct realization, of the stretch of time which they represent.
To say that De Soto, the first white man who ever saw the Mississippi River,
saw it in 1542, is a remark which states a fact without interpreting it:
it is something like giving the dimensions of a sunset by astronomical
measurements, and cataloguing the colors by their scientific names;--as a
result, you get the bald fact of the sunset, but you don't see the sunset.
It would have been better to paint a picture of it.

The date 1542, standing by itself, means little or nothing to us;
but when one groups a few neighboring historical dates and facts
around it, he adds perspective and color, and then realizes that this
is one of the American dates which is quite respectable for age.

For instance, when the Mississippi was first seen by a white man, less than
a quarter of a century had elapsed since Francis I.'s defeat at Pavia;
the death of Raphael; the death of Bayard, SANS PEUR ET SANS REPROCHE;
the driving out of the Knights-Hospitallers from Rhodes by the Turks;
and the placarding of the Ninety-Five Propositions,--the act which
began the Reformation.  When De Soto took his glimpse of the river,
Ignatius Loyola was an obscure name; the order of the Jesuits was not
yet a year old; Michael Angelo's paint was not yet dry on the Last
Judgment in the Sistine Chapel; Mary Queen of Scots was not yet born,
but would be before the year closed.  Catherine de Medici was a child;
Elizabeth of England was not yet in her teens; Calvin, Benvenuto Cellini,
and the Emperor Charles V. were at the top of their fame,
and each was manufacturing history after his own peculiar fashion;
Margaret of Navarre was writing the 'Heptameron' and some religious books,--
the first survives, the others are forgotten, wit and indelicacy
being sometimes better literature preservers than holiness;
lax court morals and the absurd chivalry business were in full feather,
and the joust and the tournament were the frequent pastime of titled fine
gentlemen who could fight better than they could spell, while religion
was the passion of their ladies, and classifying their offspring
into children of full rank and children by brevet their pastime.
In fact, all around, religion was in a peculiarly blooming condition:
the Council of Trent was being called; the Spanish Inquisition was roasting,
and racking, and burning, with a free hand; elsewhere on the continent
the nations were being persuaded to holy living by the sword and fire;
in England, Henry VIII. had suppressed the monasteries, burnt Fisher
and another bishop or two, and was getting his English reformation
and his harem effectively started.  When De Soto stood on the banks
of the Mississippi, it was still two years before Luther's death;
eleven years before the burning of Servetus; thirty years before
the St. Bartholomew slaughter; Rabelais was not yet published;
'Don Quixote' was not yet written; Shakespeare was not yet born;
a hundred long years must still elapse before Englishmen would hear the name
of Oliver Cromwell.

Unquestionably the discovery of the Mississippi is a datable
fact which considerably mellows and modifies the shiny newness
of our country, and gives her a most respectable outside-aspect
of rustiness and antiquity.

De Soto merely glimpsed the river, then died and was buried
in it by his priests and soldiers.  One would expect the priests
and the soldiers to multiply the river's dimensions by ten--
the Spanish custom of the day--and thus move other adventurers