ll conscience now I reckon there are reasons for it.
However, both of us are to blame, you and I.  You see, you used to be
conscientious about a great many things; morbidly so, I may say.  It was
a great many years ago.  You probably do not remember it now.  Well,
I took a great interest in my work, and I so enjoyed the anguish which
certain pet sins of yours afflicted you with that I kept pelting at you
until I rather overdid the matter.  You began to rebel.  Of course I
began to lose ground, then, and shrivel a little--diminish in stature,
get moldy, and grow deformed.  The more I weakened, the more stubbornly
you fastened on to those particular sins; till at last the places on my
person that represent those vices became as callous as shark-skin.  Take
smoking, for instance.  I played that card a little too long, and I lost.
When people plead with you at this late day to quit that vice, that old
callous place seems to enlarge and cover me all over like a shirt of
mail.  It exerts a mysterious, smothering effect; and presently I, your
faithful hater, your devoted Conscience, go sound asleep!  Sound?  It is
no name for it.  I couldn't hear it thunder at such a time.  You have
some few other vices--perhaps eighty, or maybe ninety--that affect me in
much the same way."

"This is flattering; you must be asleep a good part of your time."

"Yes, of late years.  I should be asleep all the time but for the help I
get."

"Who helps you?"

"Other consciences.  Whenever a person whose conscience I am acquainted
with tries to plead with you about the vices you are callous to, I get my
friend to give his client a pang concerning some villainy of his own,
and that shuts off his meddling and starts him off to hunt personal
consolation.  My field of usefulness is about trimmed down to tramps,
budding authoresses, and that line of goods now; but don't you worry
--I'll harry you on theirs while they last!  Just you put your trust in
me."

"I think I can.  But if you had only been good enough to mention these
facts some thirty years ago, I should have turned my particular attention
to sin, and I think that by this time I should not only have had you
pretty permanently asleep on the entire list of human vices, but reduced
to the size of a homeopathic pill, at that.  That is about the style of
conscience I am pining for.  If I only had you shrunk you down to a
homeopathic pill, and could get my hands on you, would I put you in a
glass case for a keepsake?  No, sir.  I would give you to a yellow dog!
That is where you ought to be--you and all your tribe.  You are not fit
to be in society, in my opinion.  Now another question.  Do you know a
good many consciences in this section?"

"Plenty of them."

"I would give anything to see some of them!  Could you bring them here?
And would they be visible to me?"

"Certainly not."

"I suppose I ought to have known that without asking.  But no matter, you
can describe them.  Tell me about my neighbor Thompson's conscience,
please."

"Very well.  I know him intimately; have known him many years.  I knew
him when he was eleven feet high and of a faultless figure.  But he is
very pasty and tough and misshapen now, and hardly ever interests himself
about anything.  As to his present size--well, he sleeps in a cigar-box."

"Likely enough.  There are few smaller, meaner men in this region than
Hugh Thompson.  Do you know Robinson's conscience?"

"Yes.  He is a shade under four and a half feet high; used to be a blond;
is a brunette now, but still shapely and comely."

"Well, Robinson is a good fellow.  Do you know Tom Smith's conscience?"

"I have known him from childhood.  He was thirteen inches high, and
rather sluggish, when he was two years old--as nearly all of us are at
that age.  He is thirty-seven feet high now, and the stateliest figure in
America.  His legs are still racked with growing-pains, but he has a good
time, nevertheless.  Never sleeps.  He is the most active and energetic
member of the New England Conscience Club; is president of it.  Night and
day you can find him pegging away at Smith, panting with his labor,
sleeves rolled up, countenance all alive with enjoyment.  He has got his
victim splendidly dragooned now.  He can make poor Smith imagine that the
most innocent little thing he does is an odious sin; and then he sets to
work and almost tortures the soul out of him about it."

"Smith is the noblest man in all this section, and the purest; and yet is
always breaking his heart because he cannot be good!  Only a conscience
could find pleasure in heaping agony upon a spirit like that.  Do you
know my aunt Mary's conscience?"

"I have seen her at a distance, but am not acquainted with her.  She
lives in the open air altogether, because no door is large enough to
admit her."

"I can believe that.  Let me see.  Do you know the conscience of that
publisher who once stole some sketches of mine for a 'series' of his, and
then left me to pay the law expenses I had to incur in order to choke him
off?"

"Yes.  He has a wide fame.  He was exhibited, a month ago, with some
other antiquities, for the benefit of a recent Member of the Cabinet's
conscience that was starving in exile.  Tickets and fares were high, but
I traveled for nothing by pretending to be the conscience of an editor,
and got in for half-price by representing myself to be the conscience of
a clergyman.  However, the publisher's conscience, which was to have been
the main feature of the entertainment, was a failure--as an exhibition.
He was there, but what of that?  The management had provided a microscope
with a magnifying power of only thirty thousand diameters, and so nobody
got to see him, after all.  There was great and general dissatisfaction,
of course, but--"

Just here there was an eager footstep on the stair; I opened the door,
and my aunt Mary burst into the room.  It was a joyful meeting and a
cheery bombardment of questions and answers concerning family matters
ensued.  By and by my aunt said:

"But I am going to abuse you a little now.  You promised me, the day I
saw you last, that you would look after the needs of the poor family
around the corner as faithfully as I had done it myself.  Well, I found
out by accident that you failed of your promise.  Was that right?"

In simple truth, I never had thought of that family a second time!  And
now such a splintering pang of guilt shot through me!  I glanced up at my
Conscience.  Plainly, my heavy heart was affecting him.  His body was
drooping forward; he seemed about to fall from the bookcase.  My aunt
continued:

"And think how you have neglected my poor protege at the almshouse, you
dear, hard-hearted promise-breaker!"  I blushed scarlet, and my tongue
was tied.  As the sense of my guilty negligence waxed sharper and
stronger, my Conscience began to sway heavily back and forth; and when my
aunt, after a little pause, said in a grieved tone, "Since you never once
went to see her, maybe it will not distress you now to know that that
poor child died, months ago, utterly friendless and forsaken!"
My Conscience could no longer bear up under the weight of my sufferings,
but tumbled headlong from his high perch and struck the floor with a
dull, leaden thump.  He lay there writhing with pain and quaking with
apprehension, but straining every muscle in frantic efforts to get up.
In a fever of expectancy I sprang to the door, locked it, placed my back
against it, and bent a watchful gaze upon my struggling master.  Already
my fingers were itching to begin their murderous work.

"Oh, what can be the matter!" exclaimed by aunt, shrinking from me, and
following with her frightened eyes the direction of mine.  My breath was
coming in short, quick gasps now, and my excitement was almost
uncontrollable.  My aunt cried out:

"Oh, do not look so!  You appal me!  Oh, what can the matter be?  What is
it you see?  Why do you stare so?  Why do you work your fingers like
that?"

"Peace, woman!"  I said, in a hoarse whisper. "Look elsewhere; pay no
attention to me; it is nothing--nothing.  I am often this way.  It will
pass in a moment.  It comes from smoking too much."

My injured lord was up, wild-eyed with terror, and trying to hobble
toward the door.  I could hardly breathe, I was so wrought up.  My aunt
wrung her hands, and said:

"Oh, I knew how it would be; I knew it would come to this at last!
Oh, I implore you to crush out that fatal habit while it may yet be time!
You must not, you shall not be deaf to my supplications longer!"
My struggling Conscience showed sudden signs of weariness!  "Oh, promise
me you will throw off this hateful slavery of tobacco!"  My Conscience
began to reel drowsily, and grope with his hands--enchanting spectacle!
"I beg you, I beseech you, I implore you!  Your reason is deserting you!
There is madness in your eye!  It flames with frenzy!  Oh, hear me, hear
me, and be saved!  See, I plead with you on my very knees!"  As she sank
before me my Conscience reeled again, and then drooped languidly to the
floor, blinking toward me a last supplication for mercy, with heavy eyes.
"Oh, promise, or you are lost!  Promise, and be redeemed!  Promise!
Promise and live!"  With a long-drawn sigh my conquered Conscience closed
his eyes and fell fast asleep!

With an exultant shout I sprang past my aunt, and in an instant I had my
lifelong foe by the throat.  After so many years of waiting and longing,
he was mine at last.  I tore him to shreds and fragments.  I rent the
fragments to bits.  I cast the bleeding rubbish into the fire, and drew
into my nostrils the grateful incense of my burnt-offering.  At last, and
forever, my Conscience was dead!

I was a free man!  I turned upon my poor aunt, who was almost petrified
with terror, and shouted:

"Out of this with your paupers, your charities, your reforms, your
pestilent morals!  You behold before you a man whose life-conflict is
done, whose soul is at peace; a man whose heart is dead to sorrow, dead
to suffering, dead to remorse; a man WITHOUT A CONSCIENCE!  In my joy I
spare you, though I could throttle you and never feel a pang!  Fly!"

She fled.  Since that day my life is all bliss.  Bliss, unalloyed bliss.
Nothing in all the world could persuade me to have a conscience again.
I settled all my old outstanding scores, and began the world anew.
I killed thirty-eight persons during the first two weeks--all of them on
account of ancient grudges.  I burned a dwelling that interrupted my
view.  I swindled a widow and some orphans out of their last cow, which
is a very good one, though not thoroughbred, I believe.  I have also
committed scores of crimes, of various kinds, and have enjoyed my work
exceedingly, whereas it would formerly have broken my heart and turned my
hair gray, I have no doubt.

In conclusion, I wish to state, by way of advertisement, that medical
colleges desiring assorted tramps for scientific purposes, either by the
gross, by cord measurement, or per ton, will do well to examine the lot
in my cellar before purchasing elsewhere, as these were all selected and
prepared by myself, and can be had at a low rate, because I wish to
clear, out my stock and get ready for the spring trade.




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Carnival of Crime in CT.
by Mark Twain






   The INTERNET WIRETAP First Electronic Edition of

            THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER
                         BY
                     MARK TWAIN
             (Samuel Langhorne Clemens)


    Electronic Edition by <dell@wiretap.spies.com>
           Released to the public June 1993



                   P R E F A C E

MOST of the adventures recorded in this book
really occurred; one or two were experiences of
my own, the rest those of boys who were schoolmates
of mine. Huck Finn is drawn from life; Tom Sawyer
also, but not from an individual -- he is a combina-
tion of the characteristics of three boys whom I knew,
and therefore belongs to the composite order of archi-
tecture.

The odd superstitions touched upon were all preva-
lent among children and slaves in the West at the
period of this story -- that is to say, thirty or
forty years ago.

Although my book is intended mainly for the en-
tertainment of boys and girls, I hope it will not be
shunned by men and women on that account, for
part of my plan has been to try to pleasantly remind
adults of what they once were themselves, and of
how they felt and thought and talked, and what queer
enterprises they sometimes engaged in.

                               THE AUTHOR.

HARTFORD, 1876.



                T O M   S A W Y E R


CHAPTER I

"TOM!"

No answer.

"TOM!"

No answer.

"What's gone with that boy,  I wonder? You TOM!"

No answer.

The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked
over them about the room; then she put them up and
looked out under them. She seldom or never looked
THROUGH them for so small a thing as a boy; they were
her state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built
for "style," not service -- she could have seen through
a pair of stove-lids just as well. She looked perplexed
for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but still
loud enough for the furniture to hear:

"Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll --"

She did not finish, for by this time she was bending
down and punching under the bed with the broom,
and so she needed breath to punctuate the punches
with. She resurrected nothing but the cat.

"I never did see the beat of that boy!"

She went to the open door and stood in it and looked
out among the tomato vines and "jimpson" weeds that
constituted the garden. No Tom. So she lifted up
her voice at an angle calculated for distance and
shouted:

"Y-o-u-u TOM!"

There was a slight noise behind her and she turned
just in time to seize a small boy by the slack of his
roundabout and arrest his flight.

"There! I might 'a' thought of that closet. What
you been doing in there?"

"Nothing."

"Nothing! Look at your hands. And look at
your mouth. What IS that truck?"

"I don't know, aunt."

"Well, I know. It's jam -- that's what it is. Forty
times I've said if you didn't let that jam alone I'd skin
you. Hand me that switch."

The switch hovered in the air -- the peril was des-
perate --

"My! Look behind you, aunt!"

The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts
out of danger. The lad fled on the instant, scrambled
up the high board-fence, and disappeared over it.

His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then
broke into a gentle laugh.

"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything? Ain't
he played me tricks enough like that for me to be look-
ing out for him by this time? But old fools is the big-
gest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,
as the saying is. But my goodness, he never plays
them alike, two days, and how is a body to know what's
coming? He 'pears to know just how long he can
torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows
if he can make out to put me off for a minute or make
me laugh, it's all down again and I can't hit him a lick.
I ain't doing my duty by that boy, and that's the Lord's
truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and spile the
child, as the Good Book says. I'm a laying up sin and
suffering for us both, I know. He's full of the Old
Scratch, but laws-a-me! he's my own dead sister's boy,
poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash him, some-
how. Every time I let him off, my conscience does
hurt me so, and every time I hit him my old heart most
breaks. Well-a-well, man that is born of woman is of
few days and full of trouble, as the Scripture says, and
I reckon it's so. He'll play hookey this evening, * and
[* Southwestern for "afternoon"]
I'll just be obleeged to make him work, to-morrow, to
punish him. It's mighty hard to make him work
Saturdays, when all the boys is having holiday, but he
hates work more than he hates anything else, and I've
GOT to do some of my duty by him, or I'll be the ruination
of the child."

Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time.
He got back home barely in season to help Jim, the
small colored boy, saw next-day's wood and split the
kindlings before supper -- at least he was there in
time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did
three-fourths of the work. Tom's younger brother
(or rather half-brother) Sid was already through
with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he
was a quiet boy, and had no adventurous, trouble-
some ways.

While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing
sugar as opportunity offered, Aunt Polly asked him
questions that were full of guile, and very deep -- for
she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments.
Like many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet
vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent for
dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to con-
template her most transparent devices as marvels of
low cunning. Said she:

"Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't
it?"

"Yes'm."

"Powerful warm, warn't it?"

"Yes'm."

"Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom?"

A bit of a scare shot through Tom -- a touch of
uncomfortable suspicion. He searched Aunt Polly's
face, but it told him nothing. So he said:

"No'm -- well, not very much."

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's
shirt, and said:

"But you ain't too warm now, though." And
it flattered her to reflect that she had discovered that
the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that that
was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her,
Tom knew where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled
what might be the next move:

"Some of us pumped on our heads -- mine's damp
yet. See?"

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked
that bit of circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick.
Then she had a new inspiration:

"Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar
where I sewed it, to pump on your head, did you?
Unbutton your jacket!"

The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened
his jacket. His shirt collar was securely sewed.

"Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure
you'd played hookey and been a-swimming. But I
forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a singed
cat, as the saying is -- better'n you look. THIS time."

She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and
half glad that Tom had stumbled into obedient con-
duct for once.

But Sidney said:

"Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar
with white thread, but it's black."

"Why, I did sew it with white! Tom!"

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out
at the door he said:

"Siddy, I'll lick you for that."

In a safe place Tom examined two large needles
which were thrust into the lapels of his jacket, and
had thread bound about them -- one needle carried
white thread and the other black. He said:

"She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid.
Confound it! sometimes she sews it with white, and
sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to gee-
miny she'd stick to one or t'other -- I can't keep the
run of 'em. But I bet you I'll lam Sid for that. I'll
learn him!"

He was not the Model Boy of the village. He
knew the model boy very well though -- and loathed
him.

Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten
all his troubles. Not because his troubles were one
whit less heavy and bitter to him than a man's are to a
man, but because a new and powerful interest bore
them down and drove them out of his mind for the time
-- just as men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excite-
ment of new enterprises. This new interest was a
valued novelty in whistling, which he had just acquired
from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it un-
disturbed. It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a
sort of liquid warble, produced by touching the tongue
to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of
the music -- the reader probably remembers how to
do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence and attention
soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode down the
street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full
of gratitude. He felt much as an astronomer feels who
has discovered a new planet -- no doubt, as far as strong,
deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage
was with the boy, not the astronomer.

The summer evenings were long. It was not dark,
yet. Presently Tom checked his whistle. A stranger
was before him -- a boy a shade larger than himself.
A new-comer of any age or either sex was an im-
pressive curiosity in the poor little shabby village of
St. Petersburg. This boy was well dressed, too --
well dressed on a week-day. This was simply as-
tounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-
buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty,
and so were his pantaloons. He had shoes on --
and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a
bright bit of ribbon. He had a citified air about him
that ate into Tom's vitals. The more Tom stared at
the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose
at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own
outfit seemed to him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If
one moved, the other moved -- but only sidewise, in a
circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all the time.
Finally Tom said:

"I can lick you!"

"I'd like to see you try it."

"Well, I can do it."

"No you can't, either."

"Yes I can."

"No you can't."

"I can."

"You can't."

"Can!"

"Can't!"

An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said:

"What's your name?"

"'Tisn't any of your business, maybe."

"Well I 'low I'll MAKE it my business."

"Well why don't you?"

"If you say much, I will."

"Much -- much -- MUCH. There now."

"Oh, you think you're mighty smart, DON'T you?
I could lick you with one hand tied behind me, if I
wanted to."

"Well why don't you DO it? You SAY you can do it."

"Well I WILL, if you fool with me."

"Oh yes -- I've seen whole families in the same fix."

"Smarty! You think you're SOME, now, DON'T you?
Oh, what a hat!"

"You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare
you to knock it off -- and anybody that'll take a dare
will suck eggs."

"You're a liar!"

"You're another."

"You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up."

"Aw -- take a walk!"

"Say -- if you give me much more of your sass I'll
take and bounce a rock off'n your head."

"Oh, of COURSE you will."

"Well I WILL."

"Well why don't you DO it then? What do you
keep SAYING you will for? Why don't you DO it? It's
because you're afraid."

"I AIN'T afraid."

"You are."

"I ain't."

"You are."

Another pause, and more eying and sidling around
each other. Presently they were shoulder to shoulder.
Tom said:

"Get away from here!"

"Go away yourself!"

"I won't."

"I won't either."

So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle
as a brace, and both shoving with might and main,
and glowering at each other with hate. But neither
could get an advantage. After struggling till both
were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with
watchful caution, and Tom said:

"You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big
brother on you, and he can thrash you with his little
finger, and I'll make him do it, too."

"What do I care for your big brother? I've got
a brother that's bigger than he is -- and what's more,
he can throw him over that fence, too." [Both brothers
were imaginary.]

"That's a lie."

"YOUR saying so don't make it so."

Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and
said:

"I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till
you can't stand up. Anybody that'll take a dare will
steal sheep."

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said:

"Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it."

"Don't you crowd me now; you better look out."

"Well, you SAID you'd do it -- why don't you do it?"

"By jingo! for two cents I WILL do it."

The new boy took two broad coppers out of his
pocket and held them out with derision. Tom struck
them to the ground. In an instant both boys were
rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like
cats; and for the space of a minute they tugged and tore
at each other's hair and clothes, punched and scratched
each other's nose, and covered themselves with dust
and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and
through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride
the new boy, and pounding him with his fists.
"Holler 'nuff!" said he.

The boy only struggled to free himself. He was
crying -- mainly from rage.

"Holler 'nuff!" -- and the pounding went on.

At last the stranger got out a smothered "'Nuff!"
and Tom let him up and said:

"Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're
fooling with next time."

The new boy went off brushing the dust from his
clothes, sobbing, snuffling, and occasionally looking
back and shaking his head and threatening what he
would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out."
To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off
in high feather, and as soon as his back was turned the
new boy snatched up a stone, threw it and hit him be-
tween the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like
an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus
found out where he lived. He then held a position at
the gate for some time, daring the enemy to come out-
side, but the enemy only made faces at him through
the window and declined. At last the enemy's mother
appeared, and called Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child,
and ordered him away. So he went away; but he
said he "'lowed" to "lay" for that boy.

He got home pretty late that night, and when he
climbed cautiously in at the window, he uncovered
an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt; and when
she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution
to turn his Saturday holiday into captivity at hard
labor became adamantine in its firmness.


CHAPTER II

SATURDAY morning was come, and all
the summer world was bright and fresh,
and brimming with life. There was a
song in every heart; and if the heart was
young the music issued at the lips. There
was cheer in every face and a spring in
every step. The locust-trees were in bloom and the
fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff
Hill, beyond the village and above it, was green with
vegetation and it lay just far enough away to seem
a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.

Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of
whitewash and a long-handled brush. He surveyed
the fence, and all gladness left him and a deep mel-
ancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards
of board fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed
hollow, and existence but a burden. Sighing, he
dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank;
repeated the operation; did it again; compared the in-
significant whitewashed streak with the far-reaching
continent of unwhitewashed fence, and sat down on a
tree-box discouraged. Jim came skipping out at the
gate with a tin pail, and singing Buffalo Gals. Bringing
water from the town pump had always been hateful
work in Tom's eyes, before, but now it did not strike
him so. He remembered that there was company
at the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and
girls were always there waiting their turns, resting,
trading playthings, quarrelling, fighting, skylarking.
And he remembered that although the pump was only
a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with
a bucket of water under an hour -- and even then some-
body generally had to go after him. Tom said:

"Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash
some."

Jim shook his head and said:

"Can't, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I
got to go an' git dis water an' not stop foolin' roun'
wid anybody. She say she spec' Mars Tom gwine
to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long
an' 'tend to my own business -- she 'lowed SHE'D 'tend
to de whitewashin'."

"Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's
the way she always talks. Gimme the bucket -- I
won't be gone only a a minute. SHE won't ever know."

"Oh, I dasn't, Mars Tom. Ole missis she'd take
an' tar de head off'n me. 'Deed she would."

"SHE! She never licks anybody -- whacks 'em over
the head with her thimble -- and who cares for that,
I'd like to know. She talks awful, but talk don't
hurt -- anyways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give
you a marvel. I'll give you a white alley!"

Jim began to waver.

"White alley, Jim! And it's a bully taw."

"My! Dat's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you!
But Mars Tom I's powerful 'fraid ole missis --"

"And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore
toe."

Jim was only human -- this attraction was too much
for him. He put down his pail, took the white alley,
and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the
bandage was being unwound. In another moment he
was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling
rear, Tom was whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt
Polly was retiring from the field with a slipper in her
hand and triumph in her eye.

But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think
of the fun he had planned for this day, and his sorrows
multiplied. Soon the free boys would come tripping
along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and they
would make a world of fun of him for having to work
-- the very thought of it burnt him like fire. He got
out his worldly wealth and examined it -- bits of toys,
marbles, and trash; enough to buy an exchange of WORK,
maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an
hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straitened
means to his pocket, and gave up the idea of trying
to buy the boys. At this dark and hopeless moment
an inspiration burst upon him! Nothing less than a
great, magnificent inspiration.

He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work.
Ben Rogers hove in sight presently -- the very boy,
of all boys, whose ridicule he had been dreading.
Ben's gait was the hop-skip-and-jump -- proof enough
that his heart was light and his anticipations high. He
was eating an apple, and giving a long, melodious
whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep-toned ding-
dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a
steamboat. As he drew near, he slackened speed,
took the middle of the street, leaned far over to star-
board and rounded to ponderously and with laborious
pomp and circumstance -- for he was personating the
Big Missouri, and considered himself to be drawing
nine feet of water. He was boat and captain and
engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself
standing on his own hurricane-deck giving the orders
and executing them:

"Stop her, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling!" The headway ran
almost out, and he drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.

"Ship up to back! Ting-a-ling-ling!" His arms
straightened and stiffened down his sides.

"Set her back on the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling!
Chow! ch-chow-wow! Chow!" His right hand, mean-
time, describing stately circles -- for it was representing
a forty-foot wheel.

"Let her go back on the labboard! Ting-a-ling-
ling! Chow-ch-chow-chow!" The left hand began
to describe circles.

"Stop the stabboard! Ting-a-ling-ling! Stop the
labboard! Come ahead on the stabboard! Stop her!
Let your outside turn over slow! Ting-a-ling-ling!
Chow-ow-ow! Get out that head-line! LIVELY now!
Come -- out with your spring-line -- what're you about
there! Take a turn round that stump with the bight
of it! Stand by that stage, now -- let her go! Done
with the engines, sir! Ting-a-ling-ling! SH'T! S'H'T!
SH'T!" (trying the gauge-cocks).

Tom went on whitewashing -- paid no attention to
the steamboat. Ben stared a moment and then said:
"Hi-YI! YOU'RE up a stump, ain't you!"

No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the
eye of an artist, then he gave his brush another gentle
sweep and surveyed the result, as before. Ben ranged
up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the
apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said:

"Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey?"

Tom wheeled suddenly and said:

"Why, it's you, Ben! I warn't noticing."

"Say -- I'm going in a-swimming, I am. Don't
you wish you could? But of course you'd druther
WORK -- wouldn't you? Course you would!"

Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said:

"What do you call work?"

"Why, ain't THAT work?"

Tom resumed his whitewashing, and answered care-
lessly:

"Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain't. All I know,
is, it suits Tom Sawyer."

"Oh come, now, you don't mean to let on that you
LIKE it?"

The brush continued to move.

"Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it.
Does a boy get a chance to whitewash a fence every day?"

That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped
nibbling his apple. Tom swept his brush daintily
back and forth -- stepped back to note the effect --
added a touch here and there -- criticised the effect
again -- Ben watching every move and getting more
and more interested, more and more absorbed. Pres-
ently he said:

"Say, Tom, let ME whitewash a little."

Tom considered, was about to consent; but he
altered his mind:

"No -- no -- I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben.
You see, Aunt Polly's awful particular about this
fence -- right here on the street, you know -- but if it
was the back fence I wouldn't mind and SHE wouldn't.
Yes, she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to
be done very careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a
thousand, maybe two thousand, that can do it the way
it's got to be done."

"No -- is that so? Oh come, now -- lemme just
try. Only just a little -- I'd let YOU, if you was me,
Tom."

"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly
-- well, Jim wanted to do it, but she wouldn't let him;
Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't let Sid. Now
don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was to tackle this
fence and anything was to happen to it --"

"Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful. Now lemme try.
Say -- I'll give you the core of my apple."

"Well, here -- No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard --"

"I'll give you ALL of it!"

Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face,
but alacrity in his heart. And while the late steamer
Big Missouri worked and sweated in the sun, the
retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by,
dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the
slaughter of more innocents. There was no lack
of material; boys happened along every little while;
they came to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By
the time Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next
chance to Billy Fisher for a kite, in good repair; and
when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in for a
dead rat and a string to swing it with -- and so on, and
so on, hour after hour. And when the middle of the
afternoon came, from being a poor poverty-stricken
boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in wealth.
He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve
marbles, part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass
to look through, a spool cannon, a key that wouldn't
unlock anything, a fragment of chalk, a glass stopper
of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six
fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass door-
knob, a dog-collar -- but no dog -- the handle of a knife,
four pieces of orange-peel, and a dilapidated old window
sash.

He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while --
plenty of company -- and the fence had three coats of
whitewash on it! If he hadn't run out of whitewash he
would have bankrupted every boy in the village.

Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow
world, after all. He had discovered a great law of
human action, without knowing it -- namely, that in
order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only
necessary to make the thing difficult to attain. If
he had been a great and wise philosopher, like the
writer of this book, he would now have comprehended
that Work consists of whatever a body is OBLIGED to
do, and that Play consists of whatever a body is not
obliged to do. And this would help him to understand
why constructing artificial flowers or performing on a
tread-mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or climbing
Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy
gentlemen in England who drive four-horse passenger-
coaches twenty or thirty miles on a daily line, in the
summer, because the privilege costs them considerable
money; but if they were offered wages for the service,
that would turn it into work and then they would
resign.

The boy mused awhile over the substantial change
which had taken place in his worldly circumstances,
and then wended toward headquarters to report.


CHAPTER III

TOM presented himself before Aunt Polly,
who was sitting by an open window in a
pleasant rearward apartment, which was
bedroom, breakfast-room, dining-room,
and library, combined. The balmy sum-
mer air, the restful quiet, the odor of the
flowers, and the drowsing murmur of the bees had
had their effect, and she was nodding over her knit-
ting -- for she had no company but the cat, and it was
asleep in her lap. Her spectacles were propped up
on her gray head for safety. She had thought that of
course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered
at seeing him place himself in her power again in this
intrepid way. He said: "Mayn't I go and play now,
aunt?"

"What, a'ready? How much have you done?"

"It's all done, aunt."

"Tom, don't lie to me -- I can't bear it."

"I ain't, aunt; it IS all done."

Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence.
She went out to see for herself; and she would have
been content to find twenty per cent. of Tom's state-
ment true. When she found the entire fence white-
washed, and not only whitewashed but elaborately
coated and recoated, and even a streak added to the
ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable.
She said:

"Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you
can work when you're a mind to, Tom." And then
she diluted the compliment by adding, "But it's power-
ful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well,
go 'long and play; but mind you get back some time in
a week, or I'll tan you."

She was so overcome by the splendor of his achieve-
ment that she took him into the closet and selected a
choice apple and delivered it to him, along with an
improving lecture upon the added value and flavor
a treat took to itself when it came without sin through
virtuous effort. And while she closed with a happy
Scriptural flourish, he "hooked" a doughnut.

Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just starting up
the outside stairway that led to the back rooms on
the second floor. Clods were handy and the air was
full of them in a twinkling. They raged around Sid
like a hail-storm; and before Aunt Polly could collect
her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue, six or
seven clods had taken personal effect, and Tom was
over the fence and gone. There was a gate, but as a
general thing he was too crowded for time to make use
of it. His soul was at peace, now that he had settled
with Sid for calling attention to his black thread and
getting him into trouble.

Tom skirted the block, and came round into a
muddy alley that led by the back of his aunt's cow-
stable. He presently got safely beyond the reach
of capture and punishment, and hastened toward the
public square of the village, where two "military"
companies of boys had met for conflict, according
to previous appointment. Tom was General of one
of these armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) General
of the other. These two great commanders did not
condescend to fight in person -- that being better suited
to the still smaller fry -- but sat together on an eminence
and conducted the field operations by orders delivered
through aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great
victory, after a long and hard-fought battle. Then
the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged, the terms
of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day
for the necessary battle appointed; after which the
armies fell into line and marched away, and Tom turned
homeward alone.

As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher
lived, he saw a new girl in the garden -- a lovely little
blue-eyed creature with yellow hair plaited into two
long-tails, white summer frock and embroidered pan-
talettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing
a shot. A certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his
heart and left not even a memory of herself behind.
He had thought he loved her to distraction; he had
regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was
only a poor little evanescent partiality. He had been
months winning her; she had confessed hardly a week
ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest boy in
the world only seven short days, and here in one instant
of time she had gone out of his heart like a casual
stranger whose visit is done.

He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till
he saw that she had discovered him; then he pre-
tended he did not know she was present, and began
to "show off" in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in
order to win her admiration. He kept up this grotesque
foolishness for some time; but by-and-by, while he was
in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic performances,
he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wending
her way toward the house. Tom came up to the
fence and leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would
tarry yet awhile longer. She halted a moment on the
steps and then moved toward the door. Tom heaved
a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But
his face lit up, right away, for she tossed a pansy over the
fence a moment before she disappeared.

The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or
two of the flower, and then shaded his eyes with his
hand and began to look down street as if he had dis-
covered something of interest going on in that direction.
Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to
balance it on his nose, with his head tilted far back;
and as he moved from side to side, in his efforts, he
edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally his
bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it,
and he hopped away with the treasure and disappeared
round the corner. But only for a minute -- only while
he could button the flower inside his jacket, next his
heart -- or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not
much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, any-
way.

He returned, now, and hung about the fence till
nightfall, "showing off," as before; but the girl never
exhibited herself again, though Tom comforted him-
self a little with the hope that she had been near some
window, meantime, and been aware of his attentions.
Finally he strode home reluctantly, with his poor head
full of visions.

All through supper his spirits were so high that
his aunt wondered "what had got into the child." He
took a good scolding about clodding Sid, and did not
seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar
under his aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped
for it. He said:

"Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it."

"Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do.
You'd be always into that sugar if I warn't watching
you."

Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid,
happy in his immunity, reached for the sugar-bowl --
a sort of glorying over Tom which was wellnigh un-
bearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl
dropped and broke. Tom was in ecstasies. In such
ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was
silent. He said to himself that he would not speak
a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit per-
fectly still till she asked who did the mischief; and then
he would tell, and there would be nothing so good in
the world as to see that pet model "catch it." He was
so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold him-
self when the old lady came back and stood above the
wreck discharging lightnings of wrath from over her
spectacles. He said to himself, "Now it's coming!"
And the next instant he was sprawling on the floor!
The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when
Tom cried out:

"Hold on, now, what 'er you belting ME for? -- Sid
broke it!"

Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked
for healing pity. But when she got her tongue again,
she only said:

"Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon.
You been into some other audacious mischief when I
wasn't around, like enough."

Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned
to say something kind and loving; but she judged
that this would be construed into a confession that she
had been in the wrong, and discipline forbade that.
So she kept silence, and went about her affairs with
a troubled heart. Tom sulked in a corner and exalted
his woes. He knew that in her heart his aunt was on
her knees to him, and he was morosely gratified by the
consciousness of it. He would hang out no signals, he
would take notice of none. He knew that a yearning
glance fell upon him, now and then, through a film of
tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured him-
self lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him
beseeching one little forgiving word, but he would
turn his face to the wall, and die with that word unsaid.
Ah, how would she feel then? And he pictured himself
brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all
wet, and his sore heart at rest. How she would throw
herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like
rain, and her lips pray God to give her back her boy
and she would never, never abuse him any more!
But he would lie there cold and white and make no
sign -- a poor little sufferer, whose griefs were at an
end. He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos
of these dreams, that he had to keep swallowing, he
was so like to choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of
water, which overflowed when he winked, and ran
down and trickled from the end of his nose. And such
a luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he
could not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or any
grating delight intrude upon it; it was too sacred
for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin
Mary danced in, all alive with the joy of seeing home
again after an age-long visit of one week to the country,
he got up and moved in clouds and darkness out at
one door as she brought song and sunshine in at the
other.

He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of
boys, and sought desolate places that were in har-
mony with his spirit. A log raft in the river invited
him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and
contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream, wish-
ing, the while, that he could only be drowned, all at
once and unconsciously, without undergoing the un-
comfortable routine devised by nature. Then he
thought of his flower. He got it out, rumpled and
wilted, and it mightily increased his dismal felicity.
He wondered if she would pity him if she knew?
Would she cry, and wish that she had a right to put
her arms around his neck and comfort him? Or
would she turn coldly away like all the hollow world?
This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable suf-
fering that he worked it over and over again in his mind
and set it up in new and varied lights, till he wore it
threadbare. At last he rose up sighing and departed
in the darkness.

About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along
the deserted street to where the Adored Unknown
lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell upon his
listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon
the curtain of a second-story window. Was the
sacred presence there? He climbed the fence, threaded
his stealthy way through the plants, till he stood under
that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion;
then he laid him down on the ground under it, dis-
posing himself upon his back, with his hands clasped
upon his breast and holding his poor wilted flower.
And thus he would die -- out in the cold world, with no
shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to
wipe the death-damps from his brow, no loving face to
bend pityingly over him when the great agony came.
And thus SHE would see him when she looked out upon
the glad morning, and oh! would she drop one little
tear upon his poor, lifeless form, would she heave
one little sigh to see a bright young life so rudely blight-
ed, so untimely cut down?

The window went up, a maid-servant's discordant
voice profaned the holy calm, and a deluge of water
drenched the prone martyr's remains!

The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving
snort. There was a whiz as of a missile in the air,
mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound as of
shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went
over the fence and shot away in the gloom.

Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was
surveying his drenched garments by the light of a
tallow dip, Sid woke up; but if he had any dim idea of
making any "references to allusions," he thought better
of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's
eye.

Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers,
and Sid made mental note of the omission.


CHAPTER IV

THE sun rose upon a tranquil world, and
beamed down upon the peaceful village
like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt
Polly had family worship: it began with a
prayer built from the ground up of solid
courses of Scriptural quotations, welded
together with a thin mortar of originality; and from
the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter of the
Mosaic Law, as from Sinai.

Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and
went to work to "get his verses." Sid had learned
his lesson days before. Tom bent all his energies to
the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of
the Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no
verses that were shorter. At the end of half an hour
Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson, but no
more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of
human thought, and his hands were busy with dis-
tracting recreations. Mary took his book to hear
him recite, and he tried to find his way through the
fog:

"Blessed are the -- a -- a --"

"Poor" --

"Yes -- poor; blessed are the poor -- a -- a --"

"In spirit --"

"In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they --
they --"

"THEIRS --"

"For THEIRS. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn,
for they -- they --"

"Sh --"

"For they -- a --"

"S, H, A --"

"For they S, H -- Oh, I don't know what it is!"

"SHALL!"

"Oh, SHALL! for they shall -- for they shall -- a -- a --
shall mourn -- a-- a -- blessed are they that shall -- they
that -- a -- they that shall mourn, for they shall -- a -- shall
WHAT? Why don't you tell me, Mary? -- what do you
want to be so mean for?"

"Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not
teasing you. I wouldn't do that. You must go and
learn it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom, you'll
manage it -- and if you do, I'll give you something ever
so nice. There, now, that's a good boy."

"All right! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is."

"Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's
nice, it is nice."

"You bet you that's so, Mary. All right, I'll tackle
it again."

And he did "tackle it again" -- and under the double
pressure of curiosity and prospective gain he did it
with such spirit that he accomplished a shining success.
Mary gave him a brand-new "Barlow" knife worth
twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight
that swept his system shook him to his foundations.
True, the knife would not cut anything, but it was a
"sure-enough" Barlow, and there was inconceivable
grandeur in that -- though where the Western boys ever
got the idea that such a weapon could possibly be
counterfeited to its injury is an imposing mystery and
will always remain so, perhaps. Tom contrived to
scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin
on the bureau, when he was called off to dress for
Sunday-school.

Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of
soap, and he went outside the door and set the basin
on a little bench there; then he dipped the soap in
the water and laid it down; turned up his sleeves;
poured out the water on the ground, gently, and then
entered the kitchen and began to wipe his face diligently
on the towel behind the door. But Mary removed
the towel and said:

"Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. You mustn't be
so bad. Water won't hurt you."

Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin was
refilled, and this time he stood over it a little while,
gathering resolution; took in a big breath and began.
When he entered the kitchen presently, with both
eyes shut and groping for the towel with his hands,
an honorable testimony of suds and water was dripping
from his face. But when he emerged from the towel,
he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean territory
stopped short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask;
below and beyond this line there was a dark expanse
of unirrigated soil that spread downward in front and
backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand,
and when she was done with him he was a man and a
brother, without distinction of color, and his saturated
hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls wrought
into a dainty and symmetrical general effect. [He
privately smoothed out the curls, with labor and dif-
ficulty, and plastered his hair close down to his head;
for he held curls to be effeminate, and his own filled his
life with bitterness.] Then Mary got out a suit of
his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during
two years -- they were simply called his "other clothes"
-- and so by that we know the size of his wardrobe.
The girl "put him to rights" after he had dressed him-
self; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin,
turned his vast shirt collar down over his shoulders,
brushed him off and crowned him with his speckled
straw hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and
uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he
looked; for there was a restraint about whole clothes
and cleanliness that galled him. He hoped that Mary
would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she
coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom,
and brought them out. He lost his temper and said
he was always being made to do everything he didn't
want to do. But Mary said, persuasively:

"Please, Tom -- that's a good boy."

So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon
ready, and the three children set out for Sunday-school
-- a place that Tom hated with his whole heart; but Sid
and Mary were fond of it.

Sabbath-school hours were from nine to half-past
ten; and then church service. Two of the children
always remained for the sermon voluntarily, and the
other always remained too -- for stronger reasons.
The church's high-backed, uncushioned pews would
seat about three hundred persons; the edifice was but
a small, plain affair, with a sort of pine board tree-box
on top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom dropped
back a step and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade:

"Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket?"

"Yes."

"What'll you take for her?"

"What'll you give?"

"Piece of lickrish and a fish-hook."

"Less see 'em."

Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the
property changed hands. Then Tom traded a couple
of white alleys for three red tickets, and some small
trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He waylaid
other boys as they came, and went on buying tickets
of various colors ten or fifteen minutes longer. He
entered the church, now, with a swarm of clean and
noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started
a quarrel with the first boy that came handy. The
teacher, a grave, elderly man, interfered; then turned his
back a moment and Tom pulled a boy's hair in the next
bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy
turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently,
in order to hear him say "Ouch!" and got a new
reprimand from his teacher. Tom's whole class were
of a pattern -- restless, noisy, and troublesome. When
they came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew
his verses perfectly, but had to be prompted all along.
However, they worried through, and each got his reward
-- in small blue tickets, each with a passage of Scripture
on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of the
recitation. Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and
could be exchanged for it; ten red tickets equalled a
yellow one; for ten yellow tickets the superintendent
gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty cents in
those easy times) to the pupil. How many of my
readers would have the industry and application to
memorize two thousand verses, even for a Dore Bible?
And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way -- it
was the patient work of two years -- and a boy of Ger-
man parentage had won four or five. He once recited
three thousand verses without stopping; but the strain
upon his mental faculties was too great, and he was
little better than an idiot from that day forth -- a
grievous misfortune for the school, for on great occa-
sions, before company, the superintendent (as Tom
expressed it) had always made this boy come out
and "spread himself." Only the older pupils managed
to keep their tickets and stick to their tedious work long
enough to get a Bible, and so the delivery of one of these
prizes was a rare and noteworthy circumstance; the
successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for that
day that on the spot every scholar's heart was fired with
a fresh ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks.
It is possible that Tom's mental stomach had never
really hungered for one of those prizes, but unques-
tionably his entire being had for many a day longed for
the glory and the eclat that came with it.

In due course the superintendent stood up in front
of the pulpit, with a closed hymn-book in his hand
and his forefinger inserted between its leaves, and
commanded attention. When a Sunday-school superin-
tendent makes his customary little speech, a hymn-book
in the hand is as necessary as is the inevitable sheet of
music in the hand of a singer who stands forward on
the platform and sings a solo at a concert -- though
why, is a mystery: for neither the hymn-book nor the
sheet of music is ever referred to by the sufferer. This
superintendent was a slim creature of thirty-five, with
a sandy goatee and short sandy hair; he wore a stiff
standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his
ears and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the
corners of his mouth -- a fence that compelled a straight
lookout ahead, and a turning of the whole body when a
side view was required; his chin was propped on a
spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a
bank-note, and had fringed ends; his boot toes were
turned sharply up, in the fashion of the day, like sleigh-
runners -- an effect patiently and laboriously produced
by the young men by sitting with their toes pressed
against a wall for hours together. Mr. Walters was
very earnest of mien, and very sincere and honest at
heart; and he held sacred things and places in such
reverence, and so separated them from worldly matters,
that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice
had acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly
absent on week-days. He began after this fashion:

"Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as
straight and pretty as you can and give me all your
attention for a minute or two. There -- that is it.
That is the way good little boys and girls should do.
I see one little girl who is looking out of the window
-- I am afraid she thinks I am out there somewhere --
perhaps up in one of the trees making a speech to the
little birds. [Applausive titter.] I want to tell you
how good it makes me feel to see so many bright, clean
little faces assembled in a place like this, learning to
do right and be good." And so forth and so on. It
is not necessary to set down the rest of the oration.
It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is
familiar to us all.

The latter third of the speech was marred by the
resumption of fights and other recreations among
certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings and whis-
perings that extended far and wide, washing even to
the bases of isolated and incorruptible rocks like
Sid and Mary. But now every sound ceased suddenly,
with the subsidence of Mr. Walters' voice, and the con-
clusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent
gratitude.

A good part of the whispering had been occasioned
by an event which was more or less rare -- the entrance
of visitors: lawyer Thatcher, accompanied by a very
feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged gentle-
man with iron-gray hair; and a dignified lady who was
doubtless the latter's wife. The lady was leading a
child. Tom had been restless and full of chafings and
repinings; conscience-smitten, too -- he could not meet
Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving
gaze. But when he saw this small new-comer his soul
was all ablaze with bliss in a moment. The next
moment he was "showing off" with all his might --
cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces -- in a word,
using every art that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and
win her applause. His exaltation had but one alloy
-- the memory of his humiliation in this angel's garden
-- and that record in sand was fast washing out, under
the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.

The visitors were given the highest seat of honor,
and as soon as Mr. Walters' speech was finished, he
introduced them to the school. The middle-aged
man turned out to be a prodigious personage -- no less
a one than the county judge -- altogether the most
august creation these children had ever looked upon --
and they wondered what kind of material he was made
of -- and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were
half afraid he might, too. He was from Constantinople,
twelve miles away -- so he had travelled, and seen the
world -- these very eyes had looked upon the county
court-house -- which was said to have a tin roof. The
awe which these reflections inspired was attested by the
impressive silence and the ranks of staring eyes. This
was the great Judge Thatcher, brother of their own
lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to
be familiar with the great man and be envied by the
school. It would have been music to his soul to hear
the whisperings:

"Look at him, Jim! He's a going up there. Say --
look! he's a going to shake hands with him -- he IS
shaking hands with him! By jings, don't you wish you
was Jeff?"

Mr. Walters fell to "showing off," with all sorts of
official bustlings and activities, giving orders, de-
livering judgments, discharging directions here, there,
everywhere that he could find a target. The librarian
"showed off" -- running hither and thither with his arms
full of books and making a deal of the splutter and
fuss that insect authority delights in. The young lady
teachers "showed off" -- bending sweetly over pupils
that were lately being boxed, lifting pretty warning
fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones lovingly.
The young gentlemen teachers "showed off" with
small scoldings and other little displays of authority
and fine attention to discipline -- and most of the
teachers, of both sexes, found business up at the library,
by the pulpit; and it was business that frequently had
to be done over again two or three times (with much
seeming vexation). The little girls "showed off" in
various ways, and the little boys "showed off" with such
diligence that the air was thick with paper wads and
the murmur of scufflings. And above it all the great
man sat and beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all
the house, and warmed himself in the sun of his own
grandeur -- for he was "showing off," too.

There was only one thing wanting to make Mr.
Walters' ecstasy complete, and that was a chance to
deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a prodigy. Several
pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough
-- he had been around among the star pupils inquiring.
He would have given worlds, now, to have that German
lad back again with a sound mind.

And now at this moment, when hope was dead,
Tom Sawyer came forward with nine yellow tickets,
nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and demanded a
Bible. This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky.
Walters was not expecting an application from this
source for the next ten years. But there was no
getting around it -- here were the certified checks,
and they were good for their face. Tom was there-
fore elevated to a place with the Judge and the other
elect, and the great news was announced from head-
quarters. It was the most stunning surprise of the
decade, and so profound was the sensation that it
lifted the new hero up to the judicial one's altitude,
and the school had two marvels to gaze upon in place
of one. The boys were all eaten up with envy -- but
those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who
perceived too late that they themselves had contributed
to this hated splendor by trading tickets to Tom for
the wealth he had amassed in selling whitewashing
privileges. These despised themselves, as being the
dupes of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass.

The prize was delivered to Tom with as much
effusion as the superintendent could pump up under
the circumstances; but it lacked somewhat of the true
gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him that there
was a mystery here that could not well bear the light,
perhaps; it was simply preposterous that this boy had
warehoused two thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom
on his premises -- a dozen would strain his capacity,
without a doubt.

Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to
make Tom see it in her face -- but he wouldn't look.
She wondered; then she was just a grain troubled; next
a dim suspicion came and went -- came again; she
watched; a furtive glance told her worlds -- and then
her heart broke, and she was jealous, and angry, and
the tears came and she hated everybody. Tom most of
all (she thought).

Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue
was tied, his breath would hardly come, his heart
quaked -- partly because of the awful greatness of
the man, but mainly because he was her parent. He
would have liked to fall down and worship him, if it
were in the dark. The Judge put his hand on Tom's
head and called him a fine little man, and asked him
what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and
got it out:

"Tom."

"Oh, no, not Tom -- it is --"

"Thomas."

"Ah, that's it. I thought there was more to it,
maybe. That's very well. But you've another one
I daresay, and you'll tell it to me, won't you?"

"Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas,"
said Walters, "and say sir. You mustn't forget
your manners."

"Thomas Sawyer -- sir."

"That's it! That's a good boy. Fine boy. Fine,
manly little fellow. Two thousand verses is a great
many -- very, very great many. And you never can be
sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for knowl-
edge is worth more than anything there is in the world;
it's what makes great men and good men; you'll be a
great man and a good man yourself, some day, Thomas,
and then you'll look back and say, It's all owing to the
precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood -- it's
all owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn
-- it's all owing to the good superintendent, who en-
couraged me, and watched over me, and gave me
a beautiful Bible -- a splendid elegant Bible -- to keep
and have it all for my own, always -- it's all owing to
right bringing up! That is what you will say, Thomas
-- and you wouldn't take any money for those two
thousand verses -- no indeed you wouldn't. And now
you wouldn't mind telling me and this lady some of
the things you've learned -- no, I know you wouldn't
-- for we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no
doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples.
Won't you tell us the names of the first two that were
appointed?"

Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking
sheepish. He blushed, now, and his eyes fell. Mr.
Walters' heart sank within him. He said to himself,
it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest
question -- why DID the Judge ask him? Yet he felt
obliged to speak up and say:

"Answer the gentleman, Thomas -- don't be afraid."

Tom still hung fire.

"Now I know you'll tell me," said the lady. "The
names of the first two disciples were --"

"DAVID AND GOLIAH!"

Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of
the scene.


CHAPTER V

ABOUT half-past ten the cracked bell of
the small church began to ring, and pres-
ently the people began to gather for the
morning sermon. The Sunday-school
children distributed themselves about the
house and occupied pews with their par-
ents, so as to be under supervision. Aunt Polly came,
and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her -- Tom being
placed next the aisle, in order that he might be as
far away from the open window and the seductive
outside summer scenes as possible. The crowd filed
up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who
had seen better days; the mayor and his wife -- for
they had a mayor there, among other unnecessaries;
the justice of the peace; the widow Douglass, fair,
smart, and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and
well-to-do, her hill mansion the only palace in the
town, and the most hospitable and much the most
lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg
could boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs.
Ward; lawyer Riverson, the new notable from a dis-
tance; next the belle of the village, followed by a troop
of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young heart-breakers;
then all the young clerks in town in a body -- for they
had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a
circling wall of oiled and simpering admirers, till the
last girl had run their gantlet; and last of all came
the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful
care of his mother as if she were cut glass. He always
brought his mother to church, and was the pride of all
the matrons. The boys all hated him, he was so good.
And besides, he had been "thrown up to them" so
much. His white handkerchief was hanging out of his
pocket behind, as usual on Sundays -- accidentally.
Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked upon boys
who had as snobs.

The congregation being fully assembled, now, the
bell rang once more, to warn laggards and stragglers,
and then a solemn hush fell upon the church which
was only broken by the tittering and whispering of
the choir in the gallery. The choir always tittered
and whispered all through service. There was once
a church choir that was not ill-bred, but I have for-
gotten where it was, now. It was a great many years
ago, and I can scarcely remember anything about it,
but I think it was in some foreign country.

The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through
with a relish, in a peculiar style which was much ad-
mired in that part of the country. His voice began
on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached
a certain point, where it bore with strong emphasis upon
the topmost word and then plunged down as if from a
spring-board:

  Shall I be car-ri-ed toe the skies, on flow'ry BEDS
     of ease,

  Whilst others fight to win the prize, and sail thro' BLOOD-
     y seas?

He was regarded as a wonderful reader. At church
"sociables" he was always called upon to read poetry;
and when he was through, the ladies would lift up their
hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps, and
"wall" their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as
to say, "Words cannot express it; it is too beautiful,
TOO beautiful for this mortal earth."

After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague
turned himself into a bulletin-board, and read off
"notices" of meetings and societies and things till it
seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of
doom -- a queer custom which is still kept up in America,
even in cities, away here in this age of abundant news-
papers. Often, the less there is to justify a traditional
custom, the harder it is to get rid of it.

And now the minister prayed. A good, generous
prayer it was, and went into details: it pleaded for
the church, and the little children of the church; for
the other churches of the village; for the village itself;
for the county; for the State; for the State officers; for
the United States; for the churches of the United States;
for Congress; for the President; for the officers of the
Government; for poor sailors, tossed by stormy seas;
for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of
European monarchies and Oriental despotisms; for such
as have the light and the good tidings, and yet have not
eyes to see nor ears to hear withal; for the heathen in the
far islands of the sea; and closed with a supplication that
the words he was about to speak might find grace and
favor, and be as seed sown in fertile ground, yielding
in time a grateful harvest of good. Amen.

There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing
congregation sat down. The boy whose history this
book relates did not enjoy the prayer, he only en-
dured it -- if he even did that much. He was restive
all through it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer,
unconsciously -- for he was not listening, but he knew
the ground of old, and the clergyman's regular route
over it -- and when a little trifle of new matter was in-
terlarded, his ear detected it and his whole nature re-
sented it; he considered additions unfair, and scoun-
drelly. In the midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the
back of the pew in front of him and tortured his spirit
by calmly rubbing its hands together, embracing its
head with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that
it seemed to almost part company with the body, and
the slender thread of a neck was exposed to view;
scraping its wings with its hind legs and smoothing
them to its body as if they had been coat-tails; going
through its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was
perfectly safe. As indeed it was; for as sorely as Tom's
hands itched to grab for it they did not dare -- he believed
his soul would be instantly destroyed if he did such
a thing while the prayer was going on. But with
the closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal
forward; and the instant the "Amen" was out the fly
was a prisoner of war. His aunt detected the act and
made him let it go.

The minister gave out his text and droned along
monotonously through an argument that was so prosy
that many a head by and by began to nod -- and yet
it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and
brimstone and thinned the predestined elect down to a
company so small as to be hardly worth the saving.
Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after church he
always knew how many pages there had been, but he
seldom knew anything else about the discourse. How-
ever, this time he was really interested for a little while.
The minister made a grand and moving picture of the
assembling together of the world's hosts at the millen-
nium when the lion and the lamb should lie down to-
gether and a little child should lead them. But the
pathos, the lesson, the moral of the great spectacle were
lost upon the boy; he only thought of the conspicuous-
ness of the principal character before the on-looking
nations; his face lit with the thought, and he said to
himself that he wished he could be that child, if it was
a tame lion.

Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argu-
ment was resumed. Presently he bethought him of a
treasure he had and got it out. It was a large black
beetle with formidable jaws -- a "pinchbug," he called
it. It was in a percussion-cap box. The first thing
the beetle did was to take him by the finger. A natural
fillip followed, the beetle went floundering into the
aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger went into
the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there working its
helpless legs, unable to turn over. Tom eyed it, and
longed for it; but it was safe out of his reach. Other
people uninterested in the sermon found relief in the
beetle, and they eyed it too. Presently a vagrant poodle
dog came idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the
summer softness and the quiet, weary of captivity, sigh-
ing for change. He spied the beetle; the drooping tail
lifted and wagged. He surveyed the prize; walked
around it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around
it again; grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then
lifted his lip and made a gingerly snatch at it, just
missing it; made another, and another; began to enjoy
the diversion; subsided to his stomach with the beetle
between his paws, and continued his experiments; grew
weary at last, and then indifferent and absent-minded.
His head nodded, and little by little his chin descended
and touched the enemy, who seized it. There was a
sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle
fell a couple of yards away, and lit on its back once
more. The neighboring spectators shook with a gentle
inward joy, several faces went behind fans and hand-
kerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy. The dog
looked foolish, and probably felt so; but there was
resentment in his heart, too, and a craving for revenge.
So he went to the beetle and began a wary attack on it
again; jumping at it from every point of a circle, light-
ing with his fore-paws within an inch of the creature,
making even closer snatches at it with his teeth, and
jerking his head till his ears flapped again. But he
grew tired once more, after a while; tried to amuse him-
self with a fly but found no relief; followed an ant around,
with his nose close to the floor, and quickly wearied of
that; yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat
down on it. Then there was a wild yelp of agony and
the poodle went sailing up the aisle; the yelps continued,
and so did the dog; he crossed the house in front of the
altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before
the doors; he clamored up the home-stretch; his
anguish grew with his progress, till presently he was
but a woolly comet moving in its orbit with the gleam
and the speed of light. At last the frantic sufferer
sheered from its course, and sprang into its master's
lap; he flung it out of the window, and the voice of
distress quickly thinned away and died in the dis-
tance.

By this time the whole church was red-faced and
suffocating with suppressed laughter, and the sermon
had come to a dead standstill. The discourse was
resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all
possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even
the gravest sentiments were constantly being received
with a smothered burst of unholy mirth, under cover
of some remote pew-back, as if the poor parson had
said a rarely facetious thing. It was a genuine relief
to the whole congregation when the ordeal was over
and the benediction pronounced.

Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking
to himself that there was some satisfaction about
divine service when there was a bit of variety in it.
He had but one marring thought; he was willing that
the dog should play with his pinchbug, but he did not
think it was upright in him to carry it off.


CHAPTER VI

MONDAY morning found Tom Sawyer
miserable. Monday morning always
found him so -- because it began another
week's slow suffering in school. He gen-
erally began that day with wishing he had
had no intervening holiday, it made the go-
ing into captivity and fetters again so much more odious.

Tom lay thinking. Presently it occurred to him
that he wished he was sick; then he could stay home
from school. Here was a vague possibility. He can-
vassed his system. No ailment was found, and he
investigated again. This time he thought he could
detect colicky symptoms, and he began to encourage
them with considerable hope. But they soon grew
feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reflected
further. Suddenly he discovered something. One of
his upper front teeth was loose. This was lucky; he
was about to begin to groan, as a "starter," as he called
it, when it occurred to him that if he came into court
with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that
would hurt. So he thought he would hold the tooth in
reserve for the present, and seek further. Nothing of-
fered for some little time, and then he remembered
hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that laid
up a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to
make him lose a finger. So the boy eagerly drew his
sore toe from under the sheet and held it up for in-
spection. But now he did not know the necessary
symptoms. However, it seemed well worth while to
chance it, so he fell to groaning with considerable
spirit.

But Sid slept on unconscious.

Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to
feel pain in the toe.

No result from Sid.

Tom was panting with his exertions by this time.
He took a rest and then swelled himself up and fetched
a succession of admirable groans.

Sid snored on.

Tom was aggravated. He said, "Sid, Sid!" and
shook him. This course worked well, and Tom began
to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then brought
himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare
at Tom. Tom went on groaning. Sid said:

"Tom! Say, Tom!" [No response.] "Here, Tom!
TOM! What is the matter, Tom?" And he shook
him and looked in his face anxiously.

Tom moaned out:

"Oh, don't, Sid. Don't joggle me."

"Why, what's the matter, Tom? I must call
auntie."

"No -- never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe.
Don't call anybody."

"But I must! DON'T groan so, Tom, it's awful.
How long you been this way?"

"Hours. Ouch! Oh, don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill
me."

"Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner ? Oh, Tom,
DON'T! It makes my flesh crawl to hear you. Tom,
what is the matter?"

"I forgive you everything, Sid. [Groan.] Every-
thing you've ever done to me. When I'm gone --"

"Oh, Tom, you ain't dying, are you? Don't, Tom
-- oh, don't. Maybe --"

"I forgive everybody, Sid. [Groan.] Tell 'em so,
Sid. And Sid, you give my window-sash and my cat
with one eye to that new girl that's come to town, and
tell her --"

But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom
was suffering in reality, now, so handsomely was his
imagination working, and so his groans had gathered
quite a genuine tone.

Sid flew down-stairs and said:

"Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom's dying!"

"Dying!"

"Yes'm. Don't wait -- come quick!"

"Rubbage! I don't believe it!"

But she fled up-stairs, nevertheless, with Sid and
Mary at her heels. And her face grew white, too,
and her lip trembled. When she reached the bed-
side she gasped out:

"You, Tom! Tom, what's the matter with you?"

"Oh, auntie, I'm --"

"What's the matter with you -- what is the matter
with you, child?"

"Oh, auntie, my sore toe's mortified!"

The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed
a little, then cried a little, then did both together.
This restored her and she said:

"Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you
shut up that nonsense and climb out of this."

The groans ceased and the pain vanished from the
toe. The boy felt a little foolish, and he said:

"Aunt Polly, it SEEMED mortified, and it hurt so I
never minded my tooth at all."

"Your tooth, indeed! What's the matter with your
tooth?"

"One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful."

"There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again.
Open your mouth. Well -- your tooth IS loose, but
you're not going to die about that. Mary, get me a
silk thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen."

Tom said:

"Oh, please, auntie, don't pull it out. It don't
hurt any more. I wish I may never stir if it does.
Please don't, auntie. I don't want to stay home
from school."

"Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this row was
because you thought you'd get to stay home from
school and go a-fishing? Tom, Tom, I love you
so, and you seem to try every way you can to break
my old heart with your outrageousness." By this
time the dental instruments were ready. The old
lady made one end of the silk thread fast to Tom's
tooth with a loop and tied the other to the bedpost.
Then she seized the chunk of fire and suddenly thrust
it almost into the boy's face. The tooth hung dangling
by the bedpost, now.

But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom
wended to school after breakfast, he was the envy of
every boy he met because the gap in his upper row
of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and
admirable way. He gathered quite a following of
lads interested in the exhibition; and one that had
cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination
and homage up to this time, now found himself sud-
denly without an adherent, and shorn of his glory.
His heart was heavy, and he said with a disdain which
he did not feel that it wasn't anything to spit like
Tom Sawyer; but another boy said, "Sour grapes!"
and he wandered away a dismantled hero.

Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the
village, Huckleberry Finn, son of the town drunkard.
Huckleberry was cordially hated and dreaded by all
the mothers of the town, because he was idle and law-
less and vulgar and bad -- and because all their children
admired him so, and delighted in his forbidden society,
and wished they dared to be like him. Tom was like
the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied
Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was un-
der strict orders not to play with him. So he played
with him every time he got a chance. Huckleberry
was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown
men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering
with rags. His hat was a vast ruin with a wide crescent
lopped out of its brim; his coat, when he wore one,
hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons
far down the b